The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Health Master, by Samuel Hopkins Adams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Health Master

Author: Samuel Hopkins Adams

Release Date: August 2, 2018 [eBook #57543]
[Most recently updated: April 14, 2021]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: David Widger

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEALTH MASTER ***




THE HEALTH MASTER

By Samuel Hopkins Adams

Associate Fellow of the American Medical Association

Boston And New York Houghton Mifflin Company

1913




_To George W. Goler, M.D., a type of the courageous, unselfish, and
far-sighted health official, whom the enlightened and progressive city
of Rochester, N. Y., hires to keep it well, on the “Chinese plan,” this
book is inscribed, with the hope that it may, by exercising some
influence in the hygienic education of the public, aid the work which
he and his fellow guardians of the public health are so laboriously and
devotedly performing throughout the nation._


Contents

 INTRODUCTORY NOTE
 I. THE CHINESE PLAN PHYSICIAN
 II. IN TIME OF PEACE
 III. REPAIRING BETTINA
 IV. THE CORNER DRUG-STORE
 V. THE MAGIC LENS
 VI. THE RE-MADE LADY
 VII. THE RED PLACARD
 VIII. HOPE FOR THE HOPELESS
 IX. THE GOOD GRAY DOCTOR
 X. THE HOUSE THAT CAUGHT COLD
 XI. THE BESIEGED CITY
 XII. PLAIN TALK
 



INTRODUCTORY NOTE


To dogmatise on questions of medical practice is to invite controversy
and tempt disaster. The highest wisdom of to-day may be completely
refuted by to-morrow’s discovery. Therefore, for the simple principles
of disease prevention and health protection which I have put into the
mouth of my Health Master, I make no claim of finality. In support of
them I maintain only that they represent the progressive specialized
thought of modern medical science. So far as is practicable I have
avoided questions upon which there is serious difference of belief
among the authorities. Where it has been necessary to touch upon these,
as, for example, in the chapter on methods of isolation in contagious
diseases, a question which arises sooner or later in every household, I
have advocated those measures which have the support of the best
rational probability and statistical support.

Not only has the book been prepared in consultation with the recognized
authorities on public health and preventive medicine, but every chapter
has been submitted to the expert criticism of specialists upon the
particular subject treated. My own ideas and theories I have advanced
only in such passages as deal with the relation of the physician and of
the citizen to the social and ethical phases of public health. To the
large number of medical scientists, both public and private, whose
generous aid and counsel have made my work possible, I gratefully
acknowledge my debt. My thanks are due also for permission to reprint,
to the _Delineator_, in which most of the chapters have appeared
serially; to _Collier’s Weekly_, and to the _Ladies’ Home Journal_.

The Author.




I.
THE CHINESE PLAN PHYSICIAN


THE eleven-o’clock car was just leaving Monument Square when Mr. Thomas
Clyde swung aboard with an ease and agility worthy of a younger and
less portly man. Fortune favored him with an unoccupied seat, into
which he dropped gratefully. Just in front of him sprawled a
heavy-shouldered young man, apparently asleep. Mr. Clyde was
unfavorably impressed both by his appearance and by the manner of his
breathing, which was as excessive as it was unusual. As the car swung
sharply around a curve the young man’s body sagged at the waist, and
lopped over toward the aisle. Before Mr. Clyde’s restraining hand could
close upon his shoulder, he had tumbled outward to the floor, and lay
quiet, with upturned face. There was a stir through the car.

“The horrid drunken creature!” exclaimed a black-clad woman opposite
Mr. Clyde. “Why do they allow such people on the cars?”

The conductor hurried forward, only to find his way blocked by a very
tall, slender man who had quietly stepped, from a seat next the window,
over an intervening messenger boy and the box he was carrying. The new
arrival on the scene of action stooped over the prostrate figure. One
glance apparently satisfied him. With a swift, sharp motion he slapped
the inert man forcefully across the cheek. The sound of the impact was
startlingly loud. The senseless head rolled over upon the left
shoulder, only to be straightened out by another quick blow. A murmur
of indignation and disgust hummed and passed, and the woman in black
called upon the conductor to stop the assault. But Mr. Thomas Clyde,
being a person of decision and action, was before the official. He
caught the assailant’s arm as it swung back again.

“Let him alone! What do you mean by beating a helpless man that way!”

“Do you know more about this affair than I do?” The crisp query was
accompanied by a backward thrust of the tall man’s elbow which broke
Mr. Clyde’s hold, and—smack! smack!—the swift double blow rocked the
victim’s head again. This time the man groaned. The car was in an
uproar. Mr. Clyde instantly and effectively pinned the tall man’s
elbows from behind. Some one pulled the bell, and the brakes ground,
throwing those forward who had pressed into the aisle. Against this
pressure, Mr. Clyde, aided by the conductor, began dragging his man
backward. The stranger was helpless to resist this grip; but as he was
forced away he perpetrated a final atrocity. Shooting out one long leg,
he caught the toe of his boot under the outstretched man’s jawbone and
jerked the chin back. This time, the object of the violence not only
groaned, but opened his eyes.

“I’ll have you in jail for that!” panted Mr. Clyde, his usually placid
temper surging up.

Other passengers began to lift the victim.

“Drop him!” snapped the tall man, with such imperative decisiveness,
that the helping hands involuntarily retracted. “Let him lie, you
fools! Do you want to kill him?”

Misgivings beset and cooled Mr. Thomas Clyde. He had now reached the
rear platform, still holding in his powerful and disabling grasp the
unknown man, when he heard a voice from an automobile which had been
halted by the abrupt stop of the car.

“Can I be of any help?”

“Dr. Magruder!” exclaimed Mr. Clyde, “come in here, will you, and look
at a sick man?”

As the doctor stepped aboard, the captive with a violent wrench freed
himself from Mr. Clyde’s relaxing hold and dropped from the platform
into the darkness. Dr. Magruder forced his way through the crowd, took
one look at the patient, and, right and left, struck him powerfully
across the cheeks time and again, until the leaden-lidded eyes opened
again. There was a quick recourse to the physician’s little satchel;
then—

“All right,” said the doctor cheerfully. “He’ll do now. But, my friend,
with that heart of yours, you want to sign the pledge or make your
will. It was touch and go with you that time.”

Waiting to hear no more, Mr. Thomas Clyde jumped from the rear step and
set off at a rapid pace, looking about him as he ran. He had not gone a
block when he saw, by the radiance of an electric light, a tall figure
leaning against a tree in an attitude of nerveless dejection. The
figure straightened up.

“Don’t try to man-handle me again,” advised the man, “or you may meet
with a disappointment.”

“I’ve come to apologize.”

“Very well,” returned the other coolly; “I appreciate it. Many a fool
wouldn’t go even so far.” Mr. Clyde smiled. “I own to the soft
impeachment. From what Dr. Magruder said I judge you saved that fellow
from the hospital.”

“I judge I did—no thanks to you! You’ve a grip like a vise.”

“Yes; I keep in good training,” said the other pleasantly. “A man of my
age has to, if he is to hold up his work.” He looked concernedly at the
stranger who had involuntarily lapsed against the tree again. “See
here,” he added, “I don’t believe you’re well.”

“No; I don’t believe I am,” answered the tall man in uncompromising
tones; “but I do believe that it is peculiarly my own affair whether I
am or not.”

“Nonsense! Man, your nerves are on the jump. You used yourself up on
that chap in the street car. Come across to my club and take something
to brace you up.”

People usually found it hard to resist Mr. Clyde’s quiet
persuasiveness. The stranger, after a moment of consideration, smiled.

“Begin with a fight and end with a drink?” he asked. “That’s a reversal
of the usual process. If your cuisine runs to a cup of hot milk as late
as this, I’d be glad to have it.”

As they entered the club, Mr. Clyde turned to his guest.

“What name shall I register?”

The stranger hesitated. “Strong,” he said finally.

“Dr. Strong?”

“Well—yes—Dr. Strong if you will.”

“Of what place?”

“Any place—Calcutta, Paris, Mexico City, Philadelphia, Rio. I’ve tried
‘em all. I’m a man without a country, as I am without a profession.” He
spoke with the unguarded bitterness of shaken nerves.

“Without a profession! But you said ‘Doctor.’”

“A title isn’t a profession,” returned the guest shortly.

Turning that over in his mind, Mr. Clyde led the way to a quiet table
in the corner of the diningroom, where he gave his order. Observing
that his new acquaintance was _distrait_, he swung into the easy
conversational flow of a cultured man of the world, at the same time
setting his keen judgment of men to work upon the other. There was much
there to interest a close observer. The face indicated not much over
thirty years; but there were harsh lines in the broad and thoughtful
forehead, and the hair that waved away from it was irregularly blotched
with gray. The eyes, very clear and liquid, were marred by an
expression of restlessness and stress. The mouth was clear-cut, with an
expression of rather sardonic humor. Altogether it was a face to remark
and remember; keen, intellectual, humorous, and worn. Mr. Thomas Clyde
decided that he liked the man.

“You’ve been a traveler, Doctor?” he asked.

“Yes. I’ve seen life in many countries—and death.”

“And traced the relations between them, I suppose?”

“Oh, I’ve flashed my little pin-point lantern at the Great Darkness in
the fond hope of discovering something,” returned the other cynically.

“In a way, I’m interested in those matters,” continued Mr. Clyde.
“They’ve organized a Public Health League here, and made me president
of it. More from finance than fitness,” he added, humorously.

“Finance has its part, too,” said the other. “Give me millions enough
and I’ll rid any city of its worst scourge, tuberculosis.”

“Then I wish to Heaven you had the millions to spend here in
Worthington! We’re in a bad way. Two years ago we elected a reform
administration. The Mayor put in a new Health Officer and we looked for
results. We’ve had them—the wrong kind. The death rate from
tuberculosis has gone up twenty-five per cent, and the number of cases
nearly fifty per cent since he took office.”

“You don’t say so!” said the stranger, showing his first evidence of
animation. “That’s good.” Mr. Clyde stared. “You think so? Then you’ll
undoubtedly be pleased to learn that other diseases are increasing
almost at the same rate: measles, scarlet fever, and so on.”

“Fine!” said Dr. Strong.

“And finally, our general mortality rate has gone up a full point. We
propose to take some action regarding it.”

“Quite right. You certainly ought to.” Something in his guest’s tone
made Mr. Clyde suspicious. “What action would you suggest, then? he
asked.

“A vote of confidence in your Health Officer.”

“You propose that we indorse the man who is responsible for a marked
rise in our mortality figures?”

“Certainly.”

“In the name of all that’s absurd, why?”

“Let me answer that by another question. If disease appears in your
household, do you want your doctor to conceal it or check it?”

Mr. Clyde took that under advisement. “You mean that this city has been
concealing its diseases, and that Dr. Merritt, our new Health Officer,
is only making known a condition which has always existed?” he asked
presently.

“Haven’t you just told me so?”

“When did I tell you anything of the sort?” The younger man smiled.
“That’s five questions in a row,” said he. “Time for an answer. You
said that deaths from tuberculosis had increased twenty-five per cent
since the new man came in.”

“Well?”

“You’re wrong. Tuberculosis doesn’t increase in sudden leaps. It isn’t
an epidemic disease, rising and receding in waves. It’s endemic, a
steady current.”

“But look at the figures. Figures don’t lie, do they?”

“Usually, in vital statistics,” was the imperturbable reply. “In this
case, probably not. That is, they don’t lie to me. I’m afraid they do
to you.” Mr. Clyde looked dubiously at the propounder of this curious
suggestion and shook his head.

“Don’t get it?” queried Dr. Strong. “Perhaps you recall the saying of
Thoreau—I think it the profoundest philosophical thought of the New
World—that it takes two to tell the truth, one to speak and one to hear
it.”

“You mean that we’ve misinterpreted the figures? Why, they’re as plain
as two and two.”

“Truth lies behind figures, not in them,” said Dr. Strong. “Now, you’re
worried because of a startling apparent swelling of the tuberculosis
rate. When you find that sort of a sudden increase, it doesn’t signify
that there’s more tuberculosis. It signifies only that there’s more
knowledge of tuberculosis. You’re getting the disease more honestly
reported; that’s all. Dr. Merritt—did you say his name is?—has stirred
up your physicians to obey the law which requires that all deaths be
promptly and properly reported, and all new cases of certain
communicable diseases, as well. Speaking as a doctor, I should say
that, with the exception of lawyers, there is no profession which
considers itself above the law so widely as the medical profession.
Therefore, your Health Officer has done something rather unusual in
bringing the doctors to a sense of their duty. As for reporting, you
can’t combat a disease until you know where it is established and
whither it is spreading. So, I say, any health officer who succeeds in
spurring up the medical profession, and in dragging the Great White
Plague out of its lurking-places into the light of day ought to have a
medal.”

“What about the other diseases? Is the same true of them?”

“Not to the same extent. No man can tell when or why the epidemic
diseases—scarlet fever, measles, whooping-cough, and diphtheria—come
and go. By the way, what about your diphtheria death rate here?”

“That is the exception to the rule. The rate is decreasing.”

Dr. Strong brought his hand down flat on the table with a force which
made his cup jump in its saucer. “And your misnamed Public Health
League proposes to take some action against the man who is shown, by
every evidence you’ve suggested thus far, to be the right man in the
right place!”

“How does the diphtheria rate show in his favor any more than the other
death rates against him?”

“Because diphtheria is the one important disease which your medical
officer can definitely control, and he seems to be doing it.”

“The only important one? Surely smallpox is controllable?”

“Smallpox is the poisoned arrow of the fool-killer. It is controllable;
but it isn’t important, except to fools and anti-vaccination bigots.”

Mr. Thomas Clyde softly rubbed his cleanshaven chin, a sign and token
with him that his mind was hard at work.

“You’re giving me a new view of a city in which I’ve lived for the
first and last forty-five years of my life,” he said presently. “Are
you familiar with conditions here?”

“Never have been here before, and have no reason to suppose that I
shall ever return. Traveling at night is too much for me, so I stopped
over to have a look at a town which has been rather notorious among
public health officials for years.”

“Notorious!” repeated Mr. Clyde, his local pride up in arms.

“For falsifying its vital statistics. Your low mortality figures are a
joke. Worthington has been more jeered at, criticized, and roasted by
various medical conventions than any other city in the United States.”

“Why, I’ve never seen anything of that sort in the papers.”

Dr. Strong laughed. “Your newspapers print what you want to read; not
what you don’t want to read. They follow the old adage, ‘What you don’t
know won’t hurt you.’ It’s a poor principle in matters of hygiene.”

“So one might suppose,” returned the host dryly. “Still you can
scarcely expect a newspaper to run down its own city. I’ve known
business to suffer for a year from sensational reports of an epidemic.”

The other grunted. “If a pest of poisonous spiders suddenly bred and
spread in Worthington, the newspapers would be full of it, and
everybody would commend the printing of the facts as a necessary
warning and safeguard. But when a pest of poisonous germs breeds and
spreads, Business sets its finger to its lips and says, ‘Hush!’ and the
newspapers obey. You’re a business man, I assume, Mr. Clyde? Frankly, I
haven’t very much sympathy with the business point of view.”

He rose and pushed his chair back.

“Wait a moment,” said the other. “Sit down. I have something that may
be of importance to suggest to you. It occurs to me that Worthington
would be the better for having a man with your ideas as a citizen. Now,
supposing the Public Health League should offer you—”

“I am not at present in medical practice,” broke in the other.

“Even at that, I was thinking that you would be of use as an advisory
physician and scientific lookout.”

For a moment, the other’s face brightened, an indication which Mr.
Clyde was quick to note. But instantly the expression of eagerness died
out.

“Ten hours a day?” said Dr. Strong. “It couldn’t be done properly in
less time. And I’m a mere nervous wreck, bound for the scrap-heap.”

“Would you mind,” said Mr. Clyde very gently, “telling me what’s wrong?
I’m not asking without a purpose.”

Dr. Strong held out his long arms before him. “I’m a surgeon without a
right hand, and a bacteriologist without a left.” The sinewy and pale
hands shook a little. “Neuritis,” he continued. “One of the diseases of
which we doctors have the most fear and the least knowledge.”

“And with the loss of your occupation, general nervous collapse?” asked
Mr. Clyde. Being himself a worker who put his heart into his work, he
could guess the sterile hopelessness of spirit of the man banned from a
chosen activity.

Dr. Strong nodded. “I may still be fit for the lecture platform as a
dispenser of other men’s knowledge. Or perhaps I’ll end up as medical
watchdog to some rich man who can afford that kind of pet. Pleasing
prospect, isn’t it, for a man who once thought himself of use in the
world?”

“Good idea,” said Mr. Clyde quietly. “Will you try the position with my
family?”

The other stared in silence at his questioner.

“Just consider my situation for a moment. As you know, I’m a layman,
interested in, but rather ignorant of, medical subjects. As wealth goes
in a city of one hundred and fifty thousand population, I’m a rich man.
At any rate, I can afford a considerable outlay to guard against
sickness. In the last five years I suppose disease has cost my
household ten thousand dollars in money, and has cost me, in worry and
consequent incapacity for work, ten times that amount. Even at a large
salary you would doubtless prove an economy. Come, what do you say?”

“You know absolutely nothing of me,” suggested the other.

“I know that you are a man of quick and correct judgment, for I saw you
in action.” The other smiled. “You are, for reasons which are your own,
not very expansive, as to your past professional career. I’m content
with that attitude of yours, and I’m quite satisfied to base my offer
on what I have been able to judge from your manner and talk. Without
boasting, I may say that I have built up a great manufacturing plant
largely on my judgment of men. I think I need you in my business of
raising a family.”

“How much of a family?”

“Five children, their mother and their grandmother. I may warn you at
once that you’ll have a jealous rival in Grandma. She’s the household
guardian, and pretty ‘sot’ in her ideas. But the principal thing is for
you to judge me as I’ve judged you, and determine whether we could work
out the plan together.”

Dr. Strong set his chin in one thin, cupped hand and gazed
consideringly upon the profferer of this strange suggestion. He saw a
strong-built, clear-skinned man, whose physical aspect did not suggest
the forty-five years to which he had owned. Mr. Clyde recommended
himself at first sight by a smooth-voiced ease of manner, and that
unostentatious but careful fitness of apparel which is, despite wise
apothegms to the contrary, so often an index of character. Under the
easy charm of address, there was unobtrusively evident a quick
intelligence, a stalwart self-respect, and a powerful will.

Yet, the doctor noted, this man had been both ready and fair in
yielding his judgment, under the suggestion of a new point of view.
Evidently he could take orders as well as give them.

“Well,” said Mr. Clyde, “have you appraised me?”

The weary eyes of the other twinkled a little. “Physically you disclose
some matters plainly enough, if one wishes to show off in the Sherlock
Holmes manner. For instance, you’ve recently been in the tropics; your
eyesight is better than your hearing, you drink lightly if at all, and
don’t use tobacco in any form; you’ve taken up athletics—handball
principally—in recent years, as the result of a bad scare you got from
a threatened paralytic attack; and your only serious illness since then
has been typhoid fever.”

Mr. Clyde laughed outright. “If you had started our acquaintance that
way,” he said, “I’d have thought you a fortune-teller. Part of it I can
follow. You noticed that I kept my left ear turned, of course; and the
fact that my nose shows no eyeglass marks would vouch for my eyesight.
Did you judge me a non-smoker because I forgot to offer you a
cigar—which deficiency I’ll gladly make up now, if it isn’t too late.”

“Partly that—no, thank you. I’m not allowed to smoke—but principally
because I noticed you disliked the odor of my hot milk. It is
offensive, but so faint that no man without a very keen sense of smell
would perceive it across a table; no tobacco-user preserves his sense
of smell to any such degree of delicacy. As for the drink, I judged
that from your eyes and general fitness.”

“And the handball, of course, from my ‘cushioned’ palms.”

“Obviously. A man at the heart of a great business doesn’t take up
violent indoor exercise without some special reason. Such a reason I
saw on the middle finger of your left hand.”

Holding up the telltale member, Mr. Clyde disclosed a small dark area
at the side of the first joint.

“Leaky fountain-pen,” he remarked.

“As you are right-handed naturally, but write with your left hand, it’s
clear that you’ve had an attack of writer’s paralysis—”

“Five years ago,” put in Mr. Clyde.

“And that your doctor made good use of the salutary scare it gave you,
to get you to take up regular exercise.”

“And, incidentally, to cut out my moderate, occasional cocktail. Now,
as to the tropics and the typhoid?”

“The latter is a guess; the former a certainty. Under your somewhat
sparse long hair in front there is an outcropping of very fine hairs.
Some special cause exists for that new growth. The most likely cause,
at your age, is typhoid. As you’ve kept in good training, it isn’t
likely that you’d have had any other serious ailment recently. On that
I took a chance. The small scars at the back of your ears could be
nothing but the marks of that little pest of the tropics, the _bête
rouge_. I’ve had him dug out of my skin and I know something of him.”

“Right on every count,” declared Mr. Clyde. “You’ve given me cumulative
proof of your value to me. I’ll tell you. Forget formalities. Let me
‘phone for a cab; we’ll go to your hotel, get your things, and you come
back with me for the night. In the morning you can look the ground
over, and decide, with the human documents before you, whether you’ll
undertake the campaign.”

The younger man smiled a very pleasant and winning smile. “You go
fast,” said he. “And as in all fast motion, you create a current in
your direction. Certainly, if I’m to consider your remarkable plan I’d
best see the whole family. But there’s one probable and perhaps
insurmountable obstacle. Who is your physician?”

“Haven’t such a thing in the house, at present,” said Mr. Clyde
lightly. Then, in a graver tone, “Our old family physician died six
months ago. He knew us all inside and out as a man knows a familiar
book.”

“A difficult loss to replace. Knowledge of your patient is half the
battle in medicine. You’ve had no one since?”

“Yes. Six weeks ago, my third boy, Charley, showed signs of fever and
we called a distant cousin of mine who has a large practice. He felt
quite sure from the first that it was diphtheria; but he so managed
matters that we had no trouble with the officials. In fact, he didn’t
report it at all, though I believe it was a very light case of the
disease.”

Dr. Strong’s eyes narrowed. “At the outset, I’ll give you two bits of
advice, gratis, Mr. Clyde. First, don’t ever call your doctor-cousin
again. He’s an anarchist.”

“Just what do you mean by that?”

“It’s plain enough, isn’t it? Anarchist, I said: a man who doesn’t
believe in law when it contravenes his convenience.”

Mr. Clyde rubbed his chin again. “Hum,” he remarked. “Well! the second
gift of advice?”

“That you either respect the law yourself or resign the presidency of
the Public Health League.” A distinct spot of red appeared on each of
the elder man’s smooth cheeks. “Are you trying to provoke me to a
quarrel?” he asked brusquely.

Then his expression mollified. “Or are you testing me?”

“Neither. I’m giving you my best and most honest advice. If you expect
me to do as your substitute physician did, to guard your household in
violation of the law which tries to protect the whole public equally,
you’ve got the wrong man, and your boasted judgment has gone askew,”
was the steady reply.

Mr. Clyde turned and left the room. When he returned his hand was
outstretched.

“I’ve taken three swallows of cold air, and sent for a cab,” he said.
“Shake hands. I think you and I will be friends. Only—train me a little
gently at the outset. You’ll come with me?”

“Yes,” said Dr. Strong, and the two men shook hands.

During the drive Mr. Clyde expounded the virtues and characteristics of
his native city to his new acquaintance, who was an excellent listener.
Long afterward he found Dr. Strong acting on remembered and shrewdly
analyzed information given in that first long talk. When they reached
the big, rambling, many-windowed house which afforded the growing Clyde
family opportunity to grow, the head of the household took his guest to
an apartment in one of the wings.

“These two rooms are yours,” he said. “I hope you’ll be like Coleridge
who came to visit with one satchel and stayed five years.”

“That remains to be seen to-morrow,” said Dr. Strong. “By the way, as I
usually read myself to sleep, you might leave me some of your local
health reports. Thus I can be looking the ground over.”

“All I’ve got you’ll find on the shelf over the desk. Good-night!”

Being of that type of man who does his thinking before and not after a
decision, Mr. Thomas Clyde arose in the morning with an untroubled mind
as to his new venture in household economics. Voices from the library
attracted him thither, as he came downstairs, and, entering, he beheld
his guest hedged in a corner by the grandmother of the Clyde household.

“Don’t tell me, young man,” the old lady was saying, in her clear,
determined voice. “You’ve not slept well for ages! I know that kind of
an eye.”

“Mrs. Sharpless has been diagnosing my case, Mr. Clyde,” called the
guest, with a rather wry smile.

“You stay here for a while,” said she vigorously, “and I’ll cocker you
up. I don’t believe you even eat properly. Do you?”

“Maybe not,” admitted the young man. “We doctors are sometimes less
wise for ourselves than for others.”

“Oh! So you’re a doctor?” asked the grandmother with a shrewd,
estimating glance.

“Dr. Strong is, I hope, going to stay with us awhile,” explained her
son-in-law.

“Good!” said Mrs. Sharpless. “And I’ll take care of him.”

“It’s a strong inducement,” said Dr. Strong gracefully. “But I want a
little more material on which to base a decision.”

“Between us Grandma and I ought to be able to answer any questions,”
said Mr. Clyde.

“About sickness, then, in the family. I’ve already introduced myself to
Mrs. Clyde and questioned her; but her information isn’t definite.”

“Myra seldom is,” observed Mr. Clyde. “It’s part of her charm. But
Grandma Sharpless has been keeping a daybook for years. Everything
that’s ever happened, from the cat’s fits to the dressmaker’s misfits,
is in that series. I’ve always thought it might come in handy
sometime.”

“Just the thing!” said Dr. Strong heartily. “Will you bring it, Mrs.
Sharpless? I hope you’ve included your comment on events as well as the
events themselves.”

“My opinions are generally pronounced enough so that I can remember
‘em, young man,” returned Mrs. Sharpless, as she departed for the
desired volumes.

“That last remark of yours sounded a little like making fun of
Grandma,” suggested Mr. Clyde, as the door closed after her.

“Far from it,” retorted Dr. Strong quickly. “Can’t you see that she’s a
born diagnostician? She’s got the sixth sense sticking out all over
her. Women more often have it than men. When a doctor has it, and
sometimes when he’s only able to counterfeit it, he becomes great and
famous.”

“Now that you speak of it, I remember my wife’s saying that when she
was a girl and lived in the country, her mother was always being sent
for in cases of illness.”

Dr. Strong nodded. “Heretical though it is to say so, I would rather
have the diagnosis of such a woman, in an obscure case, than of many a
doctor. She learns in the school of experience.”

Here, Mrs. Sharpless returned, carrying several diaries.

“These go five years back,” said she. “You’ll find ‘em pretty complete.
We’ve had our fair share of trouble; measles, whooping-cough,—I thought
Betsy was going to bark her poor little head off,—mumps, and
chicken-pox. I nursed ‘em through, myself.”

“All of them?”

“All of ‘em didn’t have all the things because Tom Clyde sent the rest
away when one of ‘em came down. All nonsense, I say. Better let ‘em get
it while they’re young, and have done with it.”

“One of the worst of the old superstitions,” said Dr. Strong quietly.

“Don’t tell me, young man! Doctor or no doctor, you can’t teach me
about children’s diseases. There isn’t any of those measly and mumpy
ones that I’m afraid of. Bobs _did_ scare me, though, with that queer
attack of his.”

“Bobs,” explained Mr. Clyde, “is Robin, one of the eight-year-old
twins.”

“Tell me about the attack.”

“When _was_ it?” said the grandmother, running over the leaves of a
selected diary. “Oh, here it is. Last March. It was short and sharp.
Only lasted three days; but the child had a dreadful fever and pretty
bad cramps.”

“Anything else?”

“Why, yes; though that idiot of a cousin of Tom’s snubbed me when I
told him about it. The boy seemed kind of numb and slow with his hands
for some time after.”

“And now?” So sharp came the question that Mr. Clyde glanced at the
speaker, not without apprehension.

“Nothing left of it that I can see.”

“What had you in mind?” asked Mr. Clyde of the doctor, curiously.

“Speaking technically, anterior poliomyelitis.” Grandma Sharpless
laughed comfortably. “I’ve noticed that a very long name like that
usually means a sore toe or a pimple behind your ear. It’s the short
names that bring the undertaker.”

“Shrewdly said, but exception noted,” said Dr. Strong.

“As for Bobs, I remember two cases I saw at Clinton years ago, like
that attack of his. One of ‘em never walked afterward, and the other
has a shriveled hand to this day.”

Dr. Strong nodded. “To come down nearer to English, that’s infantile
paralysis, one of the mysteries of medicine. I’ll tell you some things
about it some day. Your Bobs had a narrow escape.”

“You’re sure it is an escape?” asked the father anxiously.

“If Mrs. Sharpless is satisfied that there’s no trace left, I am.”

“Come in to breakfast,” said Mrs. Clyde, entering the room with a child
attached to either hand. She was a tall, fair woman with the charm of
fresh coloring and regular features, large, intelligent eyes, and a
somewhat restless vigor and vitality. That her husband and children
adored her was obvious. One had to look twice to perceive that she was
over thirty; and even a careful estimate did not suggest her real age
of thirty-seven.

During the introductory meal, Dr. Strong talked mostly to her, but he
kept watching the children. And when it was over, he went to his study
and made an inventory, in the order of age.

GRANDMA SHARPLESS;
_Probably 70; sound and firm as a good apple; ought to live to be 90.
Medical demands, none._

MR. CLYDE;
_45; sturdy, restrained, active, phlegmatic: Tends to
over-concentration; his own best physician._

MRS. CLYDE;
_35; possibly more. Quick-witted, nervously active; eager, perhaps a
little greedy of enjoyment. Somewhat intemperate; probably in eating,
possibly in the use of tea or candy. An invariably loving mother; not
invariably a wise one._

MAYNARD, _otherwise_ “MANNY” CLYDE;
_14 years old; rangy, good-tempered, intelligent boy with a good
physical equipment._ (_Note: watch his eyes._)

ROBIN, _alias_ BOBS _and_ JULIA (_mysteriously_) JUNKUM;
_8-year old twins; Bobs, quick and flashing like his mother; Julia,
demure, thoughtful, a little lethargic, and with much of her father s
winning quality of friendliness._ (_Note: test Bobs for reflexes. Watch
Julia's habits of play._)

CHARLES;
_Aged 7; strong rough-and-tumble urchin, the particular pet of his
grandmother._ (_Note: watch his hand motions._)

BETTINA, _alias variously_ BETSY, TOOTS, TWINKLES, _and the_ CHERUB;
_4 years old; a Duck_ [here the human side of the doctor broke
through], _though a little spoiled by her father._ (_Note: a
mouth-breather; the first case to be considered._)

ADDENDUM;
_Various servants, not yet identified or studied; but none the less
members of our household community._


This catalogue Dr. Strong put away, with Grandma Sharpless’s day books,
for further notation and amplification. Then he made three visits: one
to the Health Bureau, one to the Water Department, and one to the City
Engineer’s office, where he spent much time over sundry maps. It was
close upon dinner-time when he returned, and immediately looked up Mr.
Clyde.

“Well?” said that gentleman.

“Assuming that I accept your offer it should be understood that I’m
only a guardian, not, a physician.”

“Meaning—”

“That I shall expect, in emergency, to call in such physicians or
others as I consider best equipped for the particular task.”

“Very well. But why that phrase ‘or others’?”

“I’ve suggested before that I am a heretic. In certain instances I
might want an osteopath, or, if I were dealing with a sick soul causing
a sick body, I might even send for a Christian Scientist.”

“You have a refreshingly catholic breadth of view.”

“I’m trying to map out for you, a rich man, as good treatment as a very
poor man would have in a hospital—that is, the best technical advice
for every hygienic emergency that may arise—plus some few extensions of
my own. Now we come to what is likely to prove the stumbling-block.”

“Set it up.”

“If I’m to take this job, I must be the autocrat, in so far as my own
department is concerned. As you know, a city health official’s powers
are arbitrary. He can burn your house down; he can imprison you; he can
establish a military régime; he can override or undo the laws which
control the ordinary procedure of life. Hygienic law, like martial law,
supersedes rights in crises. You are asking me to act as health officer
of your house. If I’m to do my work, I must have full sway, and I shall
expect you to see that every member of your household obeys my
orders—except,” he added, with a twinkle, “Grandma Sharpless. I expect
she’s too old to take orders from any one. Diplomacy must be my agent
with her.”

Mr. Clyde pondered. “That’s a pretty wide authority you’re asking.”

“Yes, but I shall use it only in extreme cases. I shall deal
extensively in advice and suggestion, which you may take or leave as
you choose. But an order will mean a life or death matter.”

“Agreed. Now, as to terms—”

“Let the terms go, until we see how much I can save you. Meantime,
don’t overestimate what I undertake to do. Suppose you just run through
the roster of what you consider the danger points, and I’ll tell you
how far I can promise anything.”

“First, then, tuberculosis, of course.”

“Practical immunity from that, as long as you maintain your present
standards of life.”

“Typhoid fever. As I told you, we’ve had one visitation.”

“There’s no reason why you should ever have another if the children
will take ordinary precautions.”

“Diphtheria?”

“We can’t guarantee the youngsters against getting it, though we can do
something to protect them. And if they do get it, we can be pretty
certain of pulling them through.”

“Scarlet fever and measles?”

“Why not add whooping-cough and influenza? The former kills as many
people as either scarlet fever or measles, and the latter twice as
many. They’re all in the same category; medical science is pretty near
helpless against their onset. You and your family may be as rigidly
careful as they will; if the family next door, or a family at the
farthermost end of the town, is careless, we’re as likely as not to
suffer for their sins. All that I can promise, then, is hope against
the occurrence of these diseases, and the constant watchfulness, when
they come, which they call for but don’t always get.”

“Cancer?”

“Eternal vigilance, again; so that, if it does come, we may discover it
in time.”

“Let me see,” mused Mr. Clyde; “what else is there? Oh—nervous and
functional disorders.”

“Functional disorders mean, usually, either a bad start, or the
heritage of some disease like scarlet fever or grippe, or excess or
carelessness in living. I think your household is free from them; and
it should remain free. As for nervous ailments, they commonly mean lack
of self-discipline. It may be overindulgence in work”—he glanced down
at his right hand—“or it may be overindulgence in play.” His glance
wandered significantly to the doorway, through which the voice of Mrs.
Clyde could be heard. “By the way, you’ve left out the greatest
destroyer of all—perhaps because you’re beyond the danger point.”

“Tuberculosis is the greatest destroyer, isn’t it?”

“Not numerically. It is beaten out by the death record of intestinal
poisoning in the very young. Your flock has run the gamut and come
through with undiminished vitality. Two of them, however, are running
life’s race under a handicap”—the father’s eyelids went up—“which I’ll
take up shortly, when I’ve fully determined the causes. They can be
repaired, one readily, the other in time. Finally, I hope to be able to
teach them the gospel of the sound, clean mind in the sound, clean
body. In a desert I might guarantee immunity from most of the ills that
flesh is heir to. Amid the complexities of our civilization, disease
and death are largely social; there is no telling from what friend the
poison may come. No man can safeguard his house. The most he can hope
for is a measure of protection. I can offer you nothing more than that,
under our compact.”

“That is enough,” returned Mr. Clyde. He took from his inner pocket a
folded paper, which he handed over to the young man. “There’s the
contract, duly signed. Come in, Grandma.”

Mrs. Sharpless, entering the door, stopped on seeing the two men.

“Business, Tom?” she asked.

“Business that you’re interested in,” said her son-in-law, and briefly
outlined his plan.

Grandma Sharpless shook a wise gray head. “I’m glad you’re going to
stay, young man,” said she. “You need looking after. But as for the
scheme, I don’t hold much with these new-fangled notions.”

“Perhaps it isn’t as new-fangled as you suppose,” returned the head of
the household. “I’ve just given Dr. Strong a contract, and where do you
suppose I got it?”

“That lawyer man of yours, probably,” said Mrs. Sharpless.

“Well, he looked it over and made sure it was sound in American law.
But essentially it’s a copy of a medical contract in force before
Hippocrates ever rolled a pill. It’s the old logical Chinese form,
whereby the doctor’s duty is prescribed as warding off sickness, not
curing it. Is that old-fashioned enough for you, grandma?”

“Chinese! My land!” said the old lady. “What do they know about
sickness?”

“They know the one most important fact in all medical practice, ma’am,”
said Dr. Strong, “that the time for locking the stable door is before
the horse is stolen, and that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound
of cure.”




II.
IN TIME OF PEACE


“How is the Chinese plan working?” asked Mr. Thomas Clyde, stretching
himself on the lounge in Dr. Strong’s study.

One week before, the doctor had been officially installed, on the
Oriental principle of guarding the Clyde household against intruding
sickness. In that time he had asked few questions. But Mr. Clyde,
himself a close observer, noted the newcomer’s quietly keen observation
of the children, and sometimes of Mrs. Clyde, as they met at mealtime.
He had remarked, too, that the nervous tension of the man was relaxing;
and guessed that he had found, in his new and unique employment,
something of that panacea of the troubled soul, congenial work. Now,
having come to Dr. Strong’s wing of the house by request, he smilingly
put his question, and was as smilingly answered.

“Your Chinese physician has been making what the Chinese call a
‘go-look-see.’ In other but less English terms, a reconnaissance.”

“In what department?”

“Earth, air, and water.” The other waved an inclusive hand.

“Any results?”

“Oh, all kinds. Preliminary report now ready. I’d like to make it a
sort of family conference.”

“Good idea! I’ll send for Mrs. Clyde and Grandma Sharpless.”

“Children out of town?” inquired Dr. Strong suggestively.

“Of course not. Oh, I see. You want us all. Servants, too?”

“The cook certainly. She should be very important to our council of
war. Perhaps we might leave the rest till later.”

They gathered in the spacious study; and Grandma Sharpless glanced
round approvingly.

“It’s like family prayers,” she commented.

“Concerted effort _is_ a sort of prayer, if it’s honest,” said Dr.
Strong gravely. “I’ve never had much of an opinion of the man who gets
up in meeting to beg the Lord for sound health for himself and family
and then goes home and sleeps with all his windows closed.”

“There are no closed windows in this house,” said Grandma Sharpless
emphatically. “I see to that, having been brought up on fresh air
myself.”

“You show it,” returned the doctor pleasantly.

“And I’ve noticed that this house breathes deep at night, through
plenty of open windows. So I can save my own breath on that topic. Just
now I want to talk milk.”

“All our milk comes from my farm,” said the head of the family. “Cows
are my hobby. You ought to see the place, Strong; it’s only ten miles
out.”

“I have seen the place.”

“What do you think of it?”

“I think you’d better get your milk somewhere else for a while.”

“Why, Dr. Strong!” protested Mrs. Clyde. “There isn’t a woman among my
friends who doesn’t envy me our cream. And the milk keeps sweet—oh, for
days, doesn’t it, Katie?”

“Yes’m,” replied the cook. “Three days, or even four, in the ice-box.”

“Doesn’t that show it’s pure?” asked Mrs. Clyde triumphantly.

Dr. Strong shook his head. “Hardly proof,” he said. “Really clean milk
will keep much longer. I have drunk milk from the Rochester municipal
supply that was thirteen days old, and as sweet as possible. And that
was in a hot August.”

“Thirteen days old! I’d be ashamed to tell it!” declared Grandma
Sharpless, with so much asperity that there was a general laugh, in
which the doctor joined.

“I shouldn’t care to try it with your milk. It is rich, but it isn’t by
any means pure. Eternal vigilance is the price of good milk. I don’t
suppose you inspect your farm once a month, do you, Mr. Clyde?”

“No; I leave that to the farmer. He’s an intelligent fellow. What’s
wrong?”

“Scientifically speaking, from 300,000 to 500,000 bacteria per cubic
centimeter.”

“Do we drink all those things when we have a glass of milk, Dr.
Strong?” inquired “Manny” Clyde, the oldest boy.

“Four or five times that many for every teaspoonful,” said the doctor.
“But it isn’t as bad as it sounds, Manny. One hundred thousand is
considered a fairly safe allowance, though _very_ good milk—the kind I
drank when it was thirteen days old—may contain only two or three
thousand. When the count runs up to half a million or so, it shows that
some kind of impurity is getting in. The bacteria in your milk may not
be disease germs at all; they may all be quite harmless varieties. But
sooner or later, if dirt gets into milk, dangerous germs will get in
with it. The high count is a good danger signal.”

“If Bliss, the farmer, has been allowing dirt to get into the milk,
he’ll find himself out of a place,” said Mr. Clyde decisively.

“Don’t be too hard on him,” advised the doctor. “His principal fault is
that he’s getting the milk dirty trying to keep it clean. He is washing
his cans with water from an open well near the barnyard. The water in
the well is badly contaminated from surface drainage. That would
account for the high number of bacteria; that and careless milking.”

“And on that account you advise me to give up the milk?” asked Mr.
Clyde.

“Only temporarily. There are other more immediate considerations. For
one thing, there are both diphtheria and typhoid near by, and the
people on the farm are in contact with them. That’s dangerous. You see,
milk under favorable conditions is one of the best cultures for germs
that is known. They flourish and multiply in it past belief. The merest
touch of contamination may spread through a whole supply, like fire
through flax. One more thing: one of your cows, I fear, is
tuberculous.”

“We might pasteurize, I suppose,” suggested Mrs. Clyde anxiously.

Dr. Strong returned a decisive negative. “Pasteurized milk is better
than poisoned milk,” he said; “but it’s a lot worse than good raw milk.
Pasteurizing simply means the semi-cooking of all the varieties of
germs, good and bad. In the process of cooking, some of the nutritive
quality is lost. To be sure, it kills the bad germs, but it also kills
the good ones.”

“Do you mean that some of the germs are actually useful?” asked Mrs.
Clyde.

“Very useful, in certain rôles. For example, the lactic acid bacteria
would be unpopular with you, Mrs. Clyde, because they are responsible
for the souring of milk. But they also perform a protective work. They
do their best to destroy any bacilli of disease which may invade their
liquid home. Now, when you pasteurize, you kill all these millions of
defenders; and any hostile germs that come along afterward and get into
the milk, through dust or other mediums, can take possession and
multiply without hindrance. Therefore pasteurized milk ought to be
guarded with extra care after the process, which it seldom is. I once
visited a large pasteurizing plant which made great boasts of its
purity of product, and saw flies coming in from garbage pail and manure
heap to contaminate the milk in the vats; milk helpless to protect
itself, because all its army of defense had been boiled to death.”

“If we are allowed neither to use our farm milk raw nor to pasteurize
it, what shall we do with it?” inquired Mr. Clyde.

“Full directions are in there,” answered Dr. Strong, pointing to an
envelope on his desk. “If you’ll look over what I’ve written, and
instruct your farmer to follow it out, you’ll have milk that is
reasonably good. I’ll go further than that; it will be even good enough
to give to the babies of the tenements, if you should have any left
over.”

Mr. Thomas Clyde proceeded to rub his chin, with some degree of
concentration, whereby Dr. Strong knew that his hint had struck in.

“Meantime,” said Mrs. Clyde, with a trace of sarcasm, “do you expect us
to live on condensed milk?”

“Not at all; on certified milk.”

“What’s that mean?” asked Miss Julia, who had a thirst for information.

“What’s a certificate, Junkum?” retorted the doctor.

“That’s what I get when I pass my examinations.”

“Right! Well, milk coming from a farm that passes all its examinations
gets a certificate from the Medical Society, which keeps a pretty
constant watch over it. The society sees that all the cattle are tested
for tuberculosis once in so often; that the cows are brushed off before
milking; that the milking is done through a cloth, through which no
dirt or dust can pass, into a can that has been cleaned by steam—not by
contaminated water—so that no germs will remain alive in it; then
cooled and sealed up and delivered. From the time the milk leaves the
cow until it comes on your table, it hasn’t touched anything that isn’t
germ-proof. That is the system I have outlined in the paper for your
farmer.”

“It sounds expensive,” commented Mrs. Clyde.

“Yes; that is the drawback. Certified milk costs from fifteen to twenty
cents a quart. But when you consider that nearly half the dead babies
were poisoned by bad milk it doesn’t seem so expensive, does it?”

“All very well for us,” said Mr. Clyde thoughtfully. “We can afford it.
But how about the thousands who can’t?”

“There’s the pity of it. Theoretically every city should maintain a
milk standard up to the requirements of the medical certification, and
allow no milk to be sold which falls short of that. It’s feasible, and
it could be done at a moderate price if we could educate the farmer to
it. Copenhagen’s milk supply is as good as the best certified milk in
this country, because the great Danish Milk Company cooperates with the
farmer, and doesn’t try to make huge profits; and its product sells
under five cents a quart. But, to answer your question, Mr. Clyde: even
a family of very moderate means could afford to take enough certified
milk for the baby, and it would pay in doctor’s bills saved. Older
children and grown-ups aren’t so much affected by milk.”

“I’ll go out to the farm to-morrow,” said Mr. Clyde. “What’s next?”

“Water, Mr. Clyde. I’ve found out where you got your typhoid, last
summer.”

“Pooh! I could have told you that,” said Mrs. Sharpless. “There was
sewer-gas in the house. It smelled to heaven the day before he was
taken down.”

“Isn’t it curious how our belief in ghosts sticks to us!” commented the
doctor, chuckling,—“malaria rising from swamps; typhoid and diphtheria
rising in sewer-gas; sheeted specters rising from country
graveyards—all in the same category.” Grandma Sharpless pushed her
spectacles up on her forehead, a signal of battle with her. “Do you
mean to tell me, young man, that there’s no harm in sewer-gas?”

“Far from it! There’s harm enough in sewer-gas, but no germs. The harm
is that the gas reduces vitality, and makes one more liable to disease
attack. It’s just as true of coal-gas as of sewer-gas, and more true of
ordinary illuminating gas than either. I’d much rather have bad
plumbing in the house than even a small leak in a gas-pipe. No, Mrs.
Sharpless, if you waited all day at the mouth of a sewer, you’d never
catch a germ from the gas. Moreover, typhoid doesn’t develop under ten
days, so your odorous outbreak of the day before could have had nothing
to do with Mr. Clyde’s illness.”

“Perhaps you’ll give us _your_ theory,” said the old lady, with an
elaboration of politeness which plainly meant, “And whatever it is, I
don’t propose to believe it.”

“Not mine, but the City Water Commissioner’s. Mr. Clyde’s case was one
of about eighty, all within a few weeks of each other. They were all
due to the criminal negligence of a city official who permitted the
river supply, which isn’t fit to drink and is used only for fire
pressure, to flood into the mains carrying the drinking supply.”

“Then why didn’t the whole city get typhoid?” asked Mr. Clyde.

“Because only a part of the system was flooded by the river water. The
problem of the city’s experts was to find out what part was being
contaminated with this dilute sewage. When the typhoid began to appear,
the Health Department, knowing the Cypress supply to be pure, suspected
milk. Not until a score of cases, showing a distribution distinct from
any milk supply, had appeared, was suspicion directed to the water
supply. Then the officials of the Water Department and Health
Department tried a very simple but highly ingenious test. They dumped a
lot of salt into the intake of the river supply, and tested hydrant
after hydrant of the reservoir supply, until they had a complete
outline of the mixed waters. From that it was easy to ascertain the
point of mixture, and stop it.”

“Our river water is always bad, isn’t it?” said Mr. Clyde. “Last summer
I had to keep Charley away from swimming-school because the tank is
filled from the river, and two children got typhoid from swallowing
some of it.”

“All foolishness, I say,” announced the grandmother. “Better let ‘em
learn to swim.”

“Can’t you swim at all?” asked Dr. Strong, turning to the
seven-year-old.

“I went five strokes once,” said Charley. “Hum-m-m! Any other
swimming-school near by?”

“No.”

“And are the children about water at all?” Dr. Strong asked the mother.

“Well; there are the canal and the river both near us, you know.”

“Then it comes down to this,” said the doctor. “The liability of
typhoid from what water Charley would swallow in the tank isn’t very
great. And if he should get it, the chances are we could pull him
through. With the best care, there should be only one chance in fifty
of a fatal result. But if Charley falls in the canal and, not knowing
how to swim, is drowned, why, that’s the end of it. Medical science is
no good there. Of two dangers choose the lesser. Better let him go on
with the swimming, Mrs. Clyde.”

“Well!” said Grandma Sharpless, “I—I—I—swanny!” This was extreme
profanity for her. “Young man, I’m glad to see for once that you’ve got
sense as well as science!”

“Do you consider the Cypress supply always safe to drink? Several times
it has occurred to me to outfit the house with filters,” said Mr.
Clyde.

“No need, so long as the present Water Department is in office,”
returned Dr. Strong. “I might almost add, no use anyway.”

“Isn’t filtered water good?” asked Manny. “They have it at the
gymnasium.”

“No house filter is absolutely sure. There’s just one way to get a
guaranteeable water: distill it. But I think you can safely use the
city supply.”

“What next, the water problem being cleared up?” asked Mr. Clyde.

“By no means cleared up. Assuming that you are reasonably safeguarded
at home, you’re just as likely—yes, even more likely—to pick up typhoid
somewhere else.”

“Why more likely?”

“For some mysterious reason a man accustomed to a good water supply is
the easiest victim to a bad. Pittsburg, for many years the most
notorious of American cities for filthy drinking, is a case in point.
Some one pointed out that when Pittsburg was prosperous, and wages
high, the typhoid rate went up; and when times were hard, it went down.
Dr. Matson, of the Health Bureau, cleared up that point, by showing
that the increase in Pittsburg’s favorite disease was mainly among the
newcomers who flocked to the city when the mills were running full
time, to fill the demand for labor. An old resident might escape, a new
one might hardly hope to. Dr. Matson made the interesting suggestion
that perhaps those who drank the diluted sewage—for that is what the
river water was—right along, came, in time, to develop a sort of
immunity; whereas the newcomer was defenseless before the bacilli.”

“Then a man, in traveling, ought to know the water supply of every city
he goes to. How is he to find out?”

“In your case, Mr. Clyde, he’s to find out from his Chinese doctor,”
said the other smiling. “I’m collecting data from state and city health
boards, on that and other points. Air will now come in for its share of
attention.”

Young Manny Clyde grinned. “What’s the use, Dr. Strong?” he said.
“Nothing to breathe but air, you know.”

“True enough, youngster; but you can pick your air to some extent, so
it’s worth while to know where it’s good and where it’s bad. Take
Chicago, for instance. It has a very high pneumonia rate, and no
wonder! The air there is a whirling mass of soot. After breathing that
stuff a while, the lungs lose something of their power to resist, and
the pneumococcus bacillus—that’s the little fellow that brings
pneumonia and is always hanging about, looking for an opening in
unprotected breathing apparatus—gets in his deadly work. Somewhere I’ve
seen it stated that one railroad alone which runs through Chicago
deposits more than a ton of cinders per year on every acre of ground
bordering on its track. Now, no man can breathe that kind of an
atmosphere and not feel the evil effects. Pittsburg is as bad, and
Cincinnati and Cleveland aren’t much better. We save on hard coal and
smoke-consumers, and lose in disease and human life, in our soft-coal
cities. When I go to any of them I pick the topmost room in the highest
hotel I can find, and thus get above the worst of it.”

“Don’t tell me that New York is unfit to breathe in!” said Mrs. Clyde,
with a woman’s love for the metropolis.

“Thus far it’s pretty clean. The worst thing about New York is that
they dry-sweep their streets and throw all the dust there is right in
your face. The next worst is the subway. When analysis was made of the
tube’s air, the experimenters were surprised to find very few germs.
But they were shocked to find the atmosphere full of tiny splinters of
steel. It’s even worse to breathe steel than to breathe coal.”

“Any railroad track must be bad, then,” said Mr. Clyde.

“Not necessarily. A steam railroad track runs mostly in the open, and
that great cleaner, the wind, takes care of most of the trouble it
stirs up. By the way, the cheaper you travel, the better you travel.”

“That sounds like one of those maxims of the many that only the few
believe,” remarked Mrs. Clyde.

“You won’t practice it, but you can safely believe it,” retorted the
doctor. “The atmosphere in a day coach is always better than in a
parlor car, because there’s an occasional direct draft through. As for
a sleeping-car,—well, I never get into one without thinking of the
definition in ‘Life’s’ dictionary: ‘Sleeping-Car—An invention for the
purpose of transporting bad air from one city to another.’”

“The poor railroads!” chuckled Mr. Clyde. “They get blamed for
everything, nowadays.”

“It may not be the Pullman Company’s fault that I don’t sleep well in
traveling, but they are certainly to blame for clinging to a type of
conveyance specially constructed for the encouragement of dirt and
disease. Look at the modern sleeping-car: heavy plush seats; soft
hangings; thick carpets; fripperies and fopperies all as gorgeous,
vulgar, expensive, tawdry, and filthy as the mind of man can devise.
Add to that, windows hermetically sealed in the winter months and
you’ve got an ideal contrivance for the encouragement of mortality.
Never do I board a sleeper without a stout hickory stick in my
suit-case. No matter how low the temperature is, I pry the window of my
lower berth open, and push the stick under.”

“And sleep in that cold draft!” cried Mrs Clyde.

“My dear Mrs. Clyde,” replied the doctor suavely, “will you tell me the
difference between a draft and a wind?”

“Is it a conundrum?”

“No; but I’ll answer it for you. A draft is inside a house; a wind
outside. You’re not afraid of wind, are you?”

“Of course not.”

“Then to you an air-current is like a burglar. It’s harmless enough
outside the room, but as soon as it comes through a window and gets
into the room, it’s dangerous.”

“Sound common sense!” put in Granny Sharpless. “Young man, I believe
you’re older than you look.”

“I’m old enough to know that pure air is better than foul warm air,
anyway. Here; I want you youngsters to understand this,” he added,
turning to the children. “When the blood has circulated through the
system, doing all the work, it gets tired out and weak. Then the lungs
bring air to it to freshen it up, and the oxygen in the air makes it
strong to fight against disease and cold. But if the air is bad, the
blood becomes half starved. So the man who breathes stuffy, close air
all night hasn’t given his blood the right supply. His whole system is
weakened, and he ‘catches cold,’ not from too much air, but too
little.”

“It’s often struck me,” said Mr. Clyde, “that I feel better traveling
in Europe than in America. Yet our Pullmans are supposed to be the best
in the world.”

“The worst!” declared Dr. Strong forcefully. “The best in luxuries, the
worst in necessities. The only real good and fairly sanitary cars
operated by the Pullman Company, outside of the high-priced stateroom
variety, are the second class transcontinentals, the tourist cars. They
have straw seats instead of plush; light hangings, and, as a rule, good
ventilation. If I go to the Pacific Coast again, it will be that way.”

There was a pause, in which rose the clear whisper of Bobs, appealing
to his mentor, Julia, for information.

“Say, Junkum, how did we get so far away from home?”

“High time we came back, isn’t it, Bobs?” approved the doctor. “Well,
suppose we return by way of the school-house. All of you go to Number
Three but Betsey, don’t you?”

“And I’m go-un next year,” announced that young lady.

“Perhaps not,” said Mrs. Clyde. “Don’t you think, Doctor, that children
are liable to catch all sorts of things in the public schools?”

“Unquestionably.”

“More so than in private schools, aren’t they?”

“Hum! Well, yes; since they’re brought into contact with a more
miscellaneous lot of comrades.”

“Which is exactly why I have insisted on our sticking to the regular
schools,” put in Mr. Clyde, with the air of quiet decisiveness. “I want
our children to be brought up like other children!” The mother shook
her head dubiously. “I wish I were sure it is the right place for
them.”

“You ought to be sure. I might even say—if you will forgive the implied
criticism—that you ought to be surer than you are.”

Alarmed at his tone, the mother leaned forward. “Is there anything the
matter at Number Three?”

“Several things. Nothing that you need worry about immediately,
however. I’ve been talking with some of the teachers, and found out a
few points. Charley’s teacher, for instance, tells me that she has a
much harder time keeping the children up to their work in the winter
term than at other times.”

“I remember Charley’s tantrums over his arithmetic, last winter,” said
Grandma Sharpless.

“My head felt funny. Kinder thick,” defended Charley.

“That is bad,” said Dr. Strong, “very bad. I’ve reported the teacher in
that grade to Dr. Merritt, the Health Officer.”

“Reported teacher?” said Charley, his eyes assuming a prominence quite
startling. “What for?”

“Starving her grade.”

Mrs. Clyde fairly bounced in her chair. “Our children are not supposed
to eat at school, Dr. Strong.”

“Starving her grade,” continued the doctor, “in the most important need
of the human organism, air.”

“How do you reach that conclusion?”

“Evidence and experience. I remember in my college days that the winter
term was considered to be the most difficult in every year. The
curriculum didn’t seem to show it, but every professor and every
undergraduate knew it. Bad air, that’s all. The recitation rooms were
kept tightly closed. The human brain can’t burn carbon and get a bright
flame of intelligence without a good draft, and the breathing is the
draft. Now, on the evidence of Charley’s teacher, when winter comes
percentages go down, although the lessons are the same. So I asked her
about the ventilation and found that she had a superstitious dread of
cold.”

“I remember Miss Benn’s room,” said Julia thoughtfully. “It used to get
awful hot there. I never liked that grade anyway, and Bobs got such bad
deportment marks.”

“Both of the twins had colds all the winter they were in that room,”
contributed Grandma Sharpless.

Up went Dr. Strong’s hands, the long fingers doubled in, in a curious
gesture which only stress of feeling ever drove him to use.

“‘When will the substitute mothers and fathers who run our schools
learn about air!” he cried. “Air! It’s the first cry of the newly born
baby. Air! It’s the last plea of the man with the death-rattle in his
throat. It’s the one free boon, and we shut it out. If I’m here next
winter, I think I’ll load up with stones and break some windows!”

“Lemme go with you!” cried Charley, with the eagerness of destruction
proper to seven years. “On the whole, Charley,” replied the other,
chuckling a little, “perhaps it’s better to smash traditions. Not
easier, but better.”

“But you wouldn’t have them study with all the windows open on a zero
day!” protested Mrs. Clyde.

“Wouldn’t I! Far rather than choke them in a close room! Why, in
Chicago, the sickly children have special classes on the roof, or in
the yards, all through the cold weather. They study in overcoats and
mittens. And they _learn_. Not only that, but they thrive on it.”

Mr. Clyde was rubbing his chin hard. “Perhaps our school system isn’t
all I bragged,” he observed.

“Not in all respects. You still stick to that relic of barbarism, the
common drinking-cup, after filtering your water. That’s a joke!”

“I don’t see the point,” confessed Mr. Clyde. “Whom is the joke on?”

“All of you who pay for the useless filters and then settle doctors’
bills for the disease spread by the drinking-cups. Don’t you understand
that in the common contagious diseases, the mouth is the danger point?
Now, you may filter water till it’s dry, but if in drinking it you put
your lips to a cup soiled by the touch of diseased lips, you’re in
danger. We think too much of the water and too little of what contains
it. I’ve seen a school in Auburn, New York, and I’ve seen a golf course
at the Country Club in Seattle, where there isn’t a glass or cup to be
found; and they have two of the best water supplies I know. A tiny
fountain spouts up to meet your lips, and your mouth touches nothing
but the running water. The water itself being pure, you can’t possibly
get any infection from it.”

“Can you get me a report on that for the Board of Education?” asked Mr.
Clyde.

“It’s already here,” said Dr. Strong quietly. “That is part of my
Chinese job of watch-dog. One other matter. A teacher in another grade,
at Number Three, with whom I talked, stood with a pencil, which she had
taken from one of her scholars, pressed to her lips. While we talked
she gave it back to the child.”

“Well, land sakes!” said Grandma Sharpless, “where’s the harm? I
suppose the poor girl was clean, wasn’t she?”

“How do I know? How does anybody know? There is a case on record where
a teacher carried the virulent bacilli of diphtheria in her throat for
three months. Suppose she had been careless about putting her lips to
the various belongings of the children. How many of them do you suppose
she would have killed with the deadly poison?”

“Didn’t she know she had diphtheria?” asked Junkum, wide-eyed.

“She hadn’t, dear. She was what we call a ‘carrier’ of disease. For
some reason which we can’t find out, a ‘carrier’ doesn’t fall ill, but
will give the disease to any one else as surely as a very sick person,
if the germs from the throat reach the throat or lips of others.”

“Some lectures on hygiene might not be amiss in Number Three,” said Mr.
Clyde.

“That’s what medical school inspectors are for—to teach the teachers.
The Board of Education should be getting it started.”

“What are you doing over there, Twinkles?” said Mr. Clyde to Bettina,
who had slipped from his knee and was sliding her chubby fist along the
window-pane.

The child looked around. “Thwat that fly,” she explained with perfect
seriousness.

“She has heard the other children talking about the fly-leaflets that
have been scattered around. Where’s the fly, Toodles?”

“Up they-arr,” replied Bettina, pointing to a far corner of the pane
where a big “green-bottle” bumped its head against the glass. “Come
down, buzzy fly.”

“Now, where,” cried Mrs. Clyde, in despair, “do you suppose that
wretched creature came from? I’m so particular always to keep the rooms
screened and darkened.”

“Please’m, it might have come from the kitchen,” suggested Katie.
“There’s a plenty of ‘em there.”

“And before that it came from your next-door neighbor’s manure-heap,”
added Dr. Strong. “That particular kind of fly breeds only in manure.
The fact is that the fly is about the nastiest thing alive. Compared to
it, a hog is a gentleman, and a vulture an epicure. It loves filth, and
unhappily, it also loves clean, household foods. Therefore the path of
its feet is direct between the two—from your neighbor’s stable-yard to
your dinner-table.”

“Disgusting!” cried Mrs. Clyde.

“Worse than disgusting: dangerous,” returned Dr. Strong, unmoved by her
distaste. “A fly’s feet are more than likely to be covered with
disease-bearing matter, which he leaves behind him.”

“Something ought to be done about Freeman’s manure-heap, next door.
I’ll see to it,” announced Mr. Clyde.

“Doubtless you could report him for maintaining a nuisance,” admitted
Dr. Strong; “in which case he might—er—conceivably retort upon you with
your unscreened garbage-pails, which are hatcheries for another variety
of fly.”

“That’s a beam in the eye for you, Tom,” said Grandma Sharpless.

“Meantime I’ll have the kitchen windows and doors screened at once,”
declared Mrs. Clyde.

“That will help,” said Dr. Strong, “though it won’t cure. You can gain
some idea, from this matter of the flies, how intricate a social
problem health really is. No man sins to himself alone, in hygiene, and
no man can thoroughly protect himself against the misdeeds of his
neighbor. It’s true that there is such a thing as individual
self-defense by a sort of personal fortifying of the body—I’ll take
that up some other time—but it’s very limited. You can carry the fight
into the enemy’s country and eradicate the evil conditions that
threaten all, only by identifying yourself with your environment, and
waging war on that basis. Mr. Clyde, do you know anything about the row
of wooden tenements in the adjoining alley?”

“Saddler’s Shacks? Not much, except that a lot of Italians live there.”

“Some live; some die. The whole settlement is a scandal of
overcrowding, dirt, and disease. I’ve made out a little local health
report of the place, for the year. Of course, it’s incomplete; but it’s
significant. Look it over.”

Mr. Clyde read aloud as follows:—

Diphtheria	11 cases	2 deaths Measles	20	1 Typhoid
fever	4	2 Scarlet fever	13	1 Whooping-cough	20	3
Acute intestinal trouble	45	10 Influenza	16	1
Tuberculosis	6	1 Pneumonia	9	4

“What do you think of it?” asked Dr. Strong.

“It’s a bad showing.”

“It’s a bad showing and a bad property. Why don’t you buy it?”

“Who? I? Are you advising me to buy a job-lot of diseases?” queried Mr.
Clyde.

“Well—as a protective investment. We’d be safe here if those tenements
were run differently.”

“But we aren’t in touch with them at all. They are around the corner on
another block.”

“Nevertheless, visitors pass daily between your house and Saddler’s
Shacks. One of the young men from there delivers bread, often with his
bare and probably filthy hands. Two of the women peddle fruit about the
neighborhood. What Saddler’s Shacks get in the way of disease, you may
easily get by transmission from them. Further, the sanitary
arrangements of the shacks are primitive, not to say prehistoric, and,
incidentally, illegal. They are within the area of fly-travel from
here, so both the human and the winged disease-bearers have the best
possible opportunity to pick up infection in its worst form.”

“Ugh!” said Mrs. Sharpless. “I’ll never eat with a fly again as long as
I live!”

“Wouldn’t it be a simple matter to have the Bureau of Health condemn
the property?” asked Mr. Clyde.

“It would not.” Dr. Strong spoke with curt emphasis.

“Certain features, you said, are illegal.”

“But pull is still stronger than law in this city.”

“Who owns Saddler’s Shacks?” asked Grandma Sharpless, going with
characteristic directness to the point.

“Mrs. Carson Searle.”

“Why, then, it’s all right,” asserted Mrs. Clyde. “I know Mrs. Searle
very well. She’s a leader in church and charitable work. Of course, she
doesn’t know about the condition of the property.”

“She knows enough about it,” retorted Dr. Strong grimly, “to go to the
Mayor over the Health Officer’s head, and put a stop to Dr. Merritt’s
order for the premises to be cleaned up at the owner’s expense. She
wants her profits undisturbed. And now, before the conference breaks
up, I propose that we organize the Household Protective Association.”

“Oh, can we children belong?” cried Julia.

“Of course. There are offices and honors enough for all. Mr. Clyde
shall be president; Mrs. Sharpless, vice-president and secretary; Mrs.
Clyde, treasurer, and each one of the rest of you shall have a
committee. Katie, I appoint you chairman of the Committee on Food, and
if any more flies get into your kitchen, you can report ‘em to the
Committee on Flies, Miss Bettina Clyde, chairman; motto, ‘Thwat that
fly!’ Manny, you like to go to the farm; you get the Committee on Milk
Supply. Junkum, your committee shall be that of school conditions.
Bobs, water is your element. As Water Commissioner you must keep watch
on the city reports. I’ll see that they are sent you regularly; and the
typhoid records.”

“You haven’t left anything for me,” protested Charley.

“Haven’t I! You’ve got one of the biggest of all jobs, air. If the
windows aren’t properly wide when the house is asleep, I want to know
it from you, and you’ll have to get up early to find out. If the Street
Cleaning Department sweeps the air full of dust because it’s too lazy
to wash down the roadway first, we’ll make a committee report to the
Mayor.”

Bettina, _alias_ Toots, _alias_ Twinkles, _alias_ the Cherub, trotted
over and laid two plump hands on the doctor’s knee.

“Ain’t you goin’ to be anyfing in the play?” she asked.

“I?” said Dr. Strong. “Of course, Toots. Every real association has to
have officers and membership, you know. I’m the Member.”




III.
REPAIRING BETTINA


“Medicine would be the ideal profession if it did not involve giving
pain,” said Dr. Strong, setting a paper-weight upon some school reports
which had just come in.

“You’ve been here three months and you haven’t hurt any one yet,” said
Mr. Clyde easily.

“No. I’ve been cautious, and perhaps a little cowardly. My place as
Chinese doctor has been such a sinecure that I’ve let things go.
Moreover, I’ve wanted to gain Mrs. Clyde’s confidence as much as
possible, before coming to the point.”

The expression of Mr. Clyde’s keen, good-humored face altered and
focused sharply. He scrutinized the doctor in silence. “Well, let’s
have it,” he said at length. “Is it my wife?”

“No. It’s Bettina.”

The father winced. “That baby!” he said. “Serious?”

“On the contrary, quite simple. _If_ it is handled wisely. But it
means—pain. Not a great deal; but still, pain.”

“An operation?”

Dr. Strong nodded. “Merely a minor one. I’ve sounded Mrs. Clyde,
without her knowing it, and she will oppose it. Mrs. Sharpless, too, I
fear. You know how women dread suffering for the children they love.”

Again Mr. Clyde winced. “It’s—it’s necessary, of course,” he said.

“Not to do it would be both stupid and cruel. Shall we call in the
women and have it out with them?”

For reply, Mr. Clyde pressed a button and sent the servant who
responded, for Mrs. Clyde and her mother. Grandma Sharpless arrived
first, took stock of the men’s grave faces, and sat down silently,
folding her strong, competent hands in her lap. But no sooner had Mrs.
Clyde caught sight of her husband’s face than her hand went to her
throat.

“What is it?” she said. “The children—”

“Nothing to be alarmed about, Mrs. Clyde,” said Dr. Strong quickly. He
pushed a chair toward her. “Sit down. It’s a question of—of what I
might call carpenter-work”—the mother laughed a nervous relief—“on
Betty.”

“Betty?” Her fears fluttered in her voice. “What about Betty?”

“She needs repairing; that’s all.”

“I don’t know what you mean! Is she hurt?”

“Not at all. She is breathing wrong. She breathes through her mouth.”

“Oh!” There was reassurance and a measure even of contempt in Mrs.
Clyde’s voice. “Lots of children do that. Perhaps she’s got a little
cold.”

“It isn’t that. This is no new thing with her. She is a
mouth-breather.”

“I’ll see that it’s corrected,” promised the mother.

“Only one thing can correct it,” said Dr. Strong gravely. “There’s a
difficulty that must be removed.”

“You mean an operation? On that baby? Do you know that she isn’t five
yet? And you want to cut her with a knife—”

“Steady, Myra,” came Mr. Clyde’s full, even speech. “Dr. Strong doesn’t
_want_ to do anything except what he considers necessary.”

“Necessary! Supposing she does breathe through her mouth! What excuse
is that for torturing her—my baby!”

“I’ll answer that, Mrs. Clyde,” said the doctor, with patient
politeness. Walking over to the window he threw it up and called, “Oh,
Tootles! Twinkles! Honorable Miss Cherub, come up here. I’ve got
something to show you.” And presently in came the child, dragging a
huge and dilapidated doll.

She was a picture of rosy health, but, for the first time, the mother
noted the drooping of the lower jaw, and the slight lift of the upper
lip, revealing the edges of two pearly teeth. Dr. Strong took from a
drawer a little wooden box, adjusted a lever and, placing the ear
pieces in Betty’s ears, bade her listen. But the child shook her head.
Again he adjusted the indicator. This time, too, she said that she
heard nothing. Not until the fourth change did she announce delightedly
that she heard a pretty bell, but that it sounded very far away.

“Now we’ll try it on mother,” said the experimenter, and added in a low
tone as he handed it to Mrs. Clyde, “I’ve set it two points less loud
than Betty’s mark. Can you hear it?”

Mrs. Clyde nodded. A look of dread came into her eyes.

“Now, Tootles, open your mouth,” directed the doctor, producing a
little oblong metal contrivance.

“I haven’t got any sore froat,” objected the young lady.

“No, but I want to look at the thoughts inside your head,” he explained
mysteriously.

With entire confidence the child opened her mouth as wide as possible,
and Dr. Strong, setting the instrument far back against her tongue,
applied his eye to the other end.

“All right, Toots,” he said, after a moment. “Get your breath, and then
let mother look.”

He showed Mrs. Clyde how to press the tiny button setting aglow an
electric lamp and lighting up the nasal passages above the throat,
which were reflected on a mirror within the contrivance and thus made
clear to the eye. Following his instructions, she set her eye to the
miniature telescope as the physician pressed it against the little
tongue.

“Well, Betty,” said Dr. Strong, as the implement was again withdrawn,
“you’ve got very nice thoughts inside that wise little head of yours.
Now you can continue bringing up your doll in the way she should go.”

As the door closed behind her the mother turned to Dr. Strong.

“Is she going to be deaf?” she asked breathlessly.

“Of course not,” he reassured her. “That will be taken care of. What
did you see above the back of the throat?”

“Little things like tiny stalactites hanging down.”

“Adenoids.”

“Where could she have gotten adenoids?” cried Mrs. Clyde.

“From her remotest imaginable ancestor, probably.”

“Why, aren’t they a disease?”

“No. An inheritance. The race has always had them. Probably they’re
vestigial salivary glands, the use of which we’ve outgrown.
Unfortunately they may overdevelop and block up the air-passages. Then
they have to come out.”

For the first time in the conference Grandma Sharpless gathered force
and speech.

“Young man,” she said solemnly—rather accusingly, in fact—“if the Lord
put adenoids in the human nose he put ‘em there for some purpose.”

“Doubtless. But that purpose, whatever it may have been, no longer
exists.”

“Everything in the human body has some use,” she persisted.

“Had,” corrected Dr. Strong. “Not has. How about your appendix?”

Mrs. Sharpless’s appendix, like the wicked, had long since ceased from
troubling, and was now at rest in alcohol in a doctor’s office, having,
previous to the change of location, given its original proprietress the
one bad scare of her life. Therefore, she blinked, not being provided
with a ready answer.

“The ancestors of man,” said Dr. Strong, “were endowed with sundry
organs, like the appendix and the adenoids, which civilized man is
better off without. And, as civilized man possesses a God-given
intelligence to tell him how to get rid of them, he wisely does so when
it’s necessary.”

“What have the adenoids to do with Betty’s deafness?” asked Mr. Clyde.

“Everything. They divert the air-currents, thicken the tubes connecting
throat and ear, and interfere with the hearing. Don’t let that little
deficiency in keenness of ear bother you, though. Most likely it will
pass with the removal of the adenoids. Even if it shouldn’t, it is too
slight to be a handicap. But I want the child to be repaired before any
of the familiar and more serious adenoid difficulties are fixed on her
for life.”

“Are there others?” asked Mrs. Clyde apprehensively.

“Oh, every imaginable kind. How could it be otherwise? Here’s the very
first principle of life, the breath, being diverted from its proper
course, in the mouth-breather; isn’t a general derangement of functions
the inevitable result? The hearing is affected, as I’ve shown you
already. The body doesn’t get its proper amount of oxygen, and the
digestion suffers. The lungs draw their air-supply in the wrong way,
and the lung capacity is diminished. The open mouth admits all kinds of
dust particles which inflame the throat and make it hospitable to
infection. By incorrect breathing the facial aspect of the
mouth-breather is variously modified and always for the worse; since
the soft facial bones of youth are altered by the continual striking of
an air-current on the roof of the mouth, which is pushed upward,
distorting the whole face.”

“None of _our_ children are distorted. You won’t find a better-looking
lot anywhere,” challenged Mrs. Sharpless, the grandmother’s pride up in
arms.

“True. None of them has had overdeveloped adenoids, except Betty. The
others all breathe through their noses. See how different their mouths
are from Betty’s lifting upper lip—very fascinating now, but
later—Well, I’ve gone so far as to prepare an object-lesson for you.
Three extreme types of the mouth-breathers are here from school by my
invitation to have some lemonade and cakes. They are outside now. When
they come in, I want each of you to make an analysis of one of them,
without their seeing it, of course. Talk with them about their work in
school. You may get ideas from that. Mrs. Sharpless, you take the
taller of the girls; Mrs. Clyde, you study the shorter. The boy goes to
you, Mr. Clyde.”

The trio of visitors entered, somewhat mystified, but delighted to be
the guests of their friend, Dr. Strong, who had a faculty of
interesting children. So shrewdly did he divert and hold their
attention that they concluded their visit and left without having
suspected the scrutiny which they had undergone.

“Now, Mrs. Clyde,” said Dr. Strong, after the good-byes were said,
“what about your girl?”

“Nothing in particular except that she’s mortally homely and doesn’t
seem very bright.”

“Homely in what respect?”

“Well, hatchet-faced, to use a slang term.”

“It’s not a slang term any more; it’s a medical term to describe a
typical result of mouth-breathing. The diversion of the breath destroys
the even arch of the teeth, pushes the central teeth up, giving that
squirrel-like expression that is so unpleasantly familiar, lengthens
the mouth from the lower jaw’s hanging down, and sharpens the whole
profile to an edge, and an ugly one. Adenoids!”

“My tall girl I thought at first was dull, but I found the poor thing
was a little deaf,” said Grandma Sharpless. “She’s got a horrid skin;
so sallow and rough and pimply. I don’t think her digestion is good. In
fact, she said she had trouble with her stomach.”

“Naturally. Her teeth are all out of place from facial malformation
caused by mouth-breathing. That means that she can’t properly chew her
food. That means in turn that her digestion must suffer. That, again,
means a bad complexion and a debilitated constitution. Adenoids! What’s
your analysis, Mr. Clyde?”

“That boy? He’s two grades behind where he should be in school. It
takes him some time to get the drift of anything that’s said to him. I
should judge his brain is weak. Anyway, I don’t see where he keeps it,
for the upper part of his face is all wrong, the roof of the mouth is
so pushed up. The poor little chap’s brain-pan must be contracted.”

“Perfectly correct, and all the result of adenoids again. The boy is
the worst example I’ve been able to find. But all three of the children
are terribly handicapped; one by a painful homeliness, one by a ruined
digestion, and the boy by a mental deficiency—and all simply and solely
because they were neglected by ignorant parents and still more ignorant
school authorities.”

“Would you have the public schools deal with such details?” asked Mr.
Clyde.

“Certainly. Have you ever heard what Goler, the Health Officer of
Rochester, asked that city? ‘Oughtn’t we to close the schools and
repair the children?’ he asked, and he kept on asking, until now
Rochester has a regular system of looking after the noses, mouths, and
eyes of its young. They want their children, in that city, to start the
battle of life in fighting trim.”

“But you don’t see many misshapen children about,” objected Mrs.
Sharpless.

“Then it’s because you don’t look. Call to your mind Hogarth’s
caricatures. Do you remember that in his crowds there are always
clubfooted, or humpbacked, or deformed people? In those days such
deformities were very common because medical science didn’t know how to
correct them in the young. To-day facial deformities, to the scientific
eye, are quite as common, though not as obvious. We’re just learning
how to correct them, and to know that the hatchet-face is a far more
serious clog on a human being’s career than is the clubfoot.”

“If Betty had a clubfoot, of course—” began Mrs. Clyde.

“Of course, you’d have it repaired at whatever cost of suffering. You’d
submit her to a long and serious operation; and probably to the
constant pain of a rigid iron frame upon her leg for months, perhaps
years. To obviate the deformity you’d consider that not too high a
price to pay, and rightly. Well, here is the case of a more
far-reaching malformation, curable by a minor operation, without
danger, mercifully quick, with only the briefest after-effects of pain,
and you draw back from it. Why?”

“The thought of the knife on that little face. Is—is that all there is
to be done?”

“No, there are the teeth. They should be looked to.”

“Nonsense! They’re only first teeth,” said

Grandma Sharpless vigorously. “What does a doctor know about teeth?”

“Lots, if he knows his business. There would be fewer dyspeptics if
physicians in general sent their patients to the dentist more promptly,
and kept them in condition to chew their food.”

“That’s all very well, when people have their real, lasting teeth,”
returned the grandmother. “But Betty’s first set will be gone in a few
years. Then it will be time enough to bother the poor child.”

“Apparently, Mrs. Sharpless,” said Dr. Strong mildly, “you consider
that teeth come in crops, like berries; one crop now, a second and
distinct crop later. That isn’t the way growth takes place in the human
mouth. The first teeth are to the second almost what the blossom is to
the fruit. I shall want immediately to take Betty to the dentist, and
have him keep watch over her mouth with the understanding that he may
charge a bonus on every tooth he keeps in after its time. The longer
the first lot lasts, the better the second lot are. But there is no use
making the minor repairs unless the main structure is put right first.”

“I must see Betty,” said Mrs. Clyde abruptly, and left the room. Mrs.
Sharpless followed. “Now comes the first real split.” Dr. Strong turned
to Mr. Clyde. “They’re going to vote me down.”

“If it comes to a pinch,” said Mr. Clyde quietly, “my wife will accept
my decision.”

“That is what I want to avoid. Where would my influence with her be, if
I were obliged to appeal to you on the very first test of professional
authority? No, I shall try to carry this through myself, even at the
risk of having to seem a little brutal.”

Mr. Clyde lifted his eyebrows, but he only nodded, as the door opened
and the two women reentered.

“Doctor,” said Mrs. Clyde, “if, in a year from now, Betty hasn’t
outgrown the mouth-breathing, I—I—you may take what measures you think
best.”

“In a year from now, the danger will be more advanced. There is not the
faintest chance of correction of the fault without an operation.”

“I can’t help it! I can’t stand the thought of it, now,” said Mrs.
Clyde brokenly. “You should see her, poor baby, as she looks now,
asleep on the lounge in the library, and even you, Doctor” (the doctor
smiled a little awry at that), “couldn’t bear to think of the blood and
the pain.” She was silent, shuddering.

“My dear Mrs. Clyde, the blood will be no more than a nosebleed, and
the pain won’t amount to much, thanks to anaesthesia. Let me see.” He
stepped to the door and, opening it softly, looked in, then beckoned to
the others to join him.

The child lay asleep on her side, one cupped pink hand hanging, the
other back of her head. Her jaw had dropped and the corner of the mouth
had slackened down in an unnatural droop. The breath hissed a little
between the soft lips. Dr. Strong closed the door again.

“Well?” he said, and there was a suggestion of the sternness of
judgment in the monosyllable.

“I am her mother.” Mrs. Clyde faced him, a spot of color in each cheek.
“A mother is a better judge of her children than any doctor can be!”

“You think so?” said Dr. Strong deliberately. “Then I must set you
right. Do you recall sending Charley away from the table for
clumsiness, two days ago?”

“Why, yes.” Mrs. Clyde’s expressive eyes widened. “He overturned his
glass, after my warning him.”

“And once last week for the same thing?”

“Yes, but what—”

“Pardon me, do you think your mother-judgment was wise then?”

“Well, really, Dr. Strong,” said Mrs. Clyde, flushing, “you will hardly
assume the right of control of the children’s manners—”

“This is not a question of manners. There is where your error lies,”
interrupted the doctor. “Against your mother-judgment I set my
doctor-judgment, and I tell you now”—his voice rose a little from its
accustomed polished smoothness, and took on authority—“I tell you that
the boy is no more responsible for his clumsiness than Betty is for bad
breathing. It’s a disease, very faint but unmistakable.”

“Not Charley!” said his father incredulously, “Why, he’s as husky as a
colt.”

“He will be, please God, in a few years, but just now he has—don’t be
alarmed; it’s nothing like so important as it sounds—he has a slight
heart trouble, probably the sequel to that light and perhaps mismanaged
diphtheria attack. It’s quite a common result and is nearly always
outgrown, and it shows in almost unnoticeable lack of control of hands
and feet. I observed Charley’s clumsiness long ago; listened at his
heart, and heard the murmur there.”

“And you never told us!” reproached the grandmother.

“What was the use? There’s nothing to be done; nothing that needs to be
done, except watch, and that I’ve been doing. And I didn’t want to
worry you.”

“Then I’ve been punishing him for what wasn’t his fault,” said Mrs.
Clyde in a choked voice.

“You have. Don’t punish Betty for what isn’t hers,” countered the
physician, swiftly taking advantage of the opening. “Give her her
chance. Mrs. Clyde, if Betty were my own, she could hardly have wound
herself more closely around my heartstrings. I want to see her grow
from a strong and beautiful child to a strong and beautiful girl, and
finally to a strong and beautiful woman. It rests with you. Watch her
breathing to-night, as she sleeps—and tell me to-morrow.”

He rose and left the room. Mr. Clyde walked over and put a hand softly
on his wife’s soft hair; then brushed her cheek with his lips.

“It’s up to you, dearest,” he said gently.

Three days later, Betty, overhanging the side fence, was heard, by her
shamelessly eavesdropping father, imparting information to her
next-door neighbor and friend.

“You’d ought to get a new nothe, Thally. It don’t hurt much, an’
breathin’ ith heapth more fun!”

Pondering a chain of suggestions induced by this advice, Mr. Clyde
walked slowly to the house. As was his habit in thought, he proceeded
to rub the idea into his chin, which was quite pink from friction by
the time he reached the library. There he found Dr. Strong and Mrs.
Sharpless in consultation.

“What are you two conspiring about?” he asked, ceasing to rub the
troubled spot.

“Matter of school reports,” answered the doctor. He glanced at the
other’s chin and smiled. “And what is worrying you?” he asked.

“I’m wondering whether I haven’t made a mistake.”

“Quite possibly. It’s done by some of our best people,” remarked the
physician dryly.

“Not a pleasant possibility in this case. You remember quoting
Rochester as to closing the schools and repairing the children. To-day,
as I heard Betty commenting on her new nose, it suddenly came to me
that I was obstructing that very system of repairs by which she is
benefiting, for less fortunate youngsters in our schools.”

“You!” said Dr. Strong in surprise.

“As president of the Public Health League. The Superintendent of
Schools came to me with a complaint against Dr. Merritt, the Health
Officer, who, he claimed, was usurping authority in his scheme for a
special inspection system to examine all schoolchildren at regular
intervals.”

“Ought to have been established long ago,” declared Dr. Strong.

“The Superintendent thinks otherwise. He claims that it would interfere
with school routine. It’s the duty of the health officials, he says, to
control epidemics from without, to keep sickness out of the schools,
not to hunt around among the children, scaring them to death about
diseases that probably aren’t there.”

Dr. Strong muttered something which Grandma Sharpless pretended not to
hear. “And you’ve agreed to support him in that attitude?” he queried.

“Well, I’m afraid I’ve half committed myself.”

“Heaven forgive you! Why, see here, Clyde, your dodo of a
superintendent talks of keeping sickness out of the schools. Doesn’t
that mean keeping sickness out of the pupils? There’s just one way to
do that: get every child into the best possible condition of
repair—eyes, ears, nose, throat, teeth, stomach, everything, and
maintain them in that state. Then disease will have a hard time
breaking down the natural resistance of the system. Damaged organs in a
child are like flaws in a ship’s armor-plate; a vital weakening of the
defenses. And remember, the child is always battling against one
besieging germ or another.”

“Why can’t medical science wipe out the germs?” demanded Mrs.
Sharpless. “It’s always claiming to do such wonders.”

“In a few instances it can. In typhoid we fight and win the battle from
the outside by doing that very thing. In smallpox, and to a lesser
extent in diphtheria, we can build up an effective artificial barrier
by inoculation. But, as medical men are now coming to realize, in the
other important contagions of childhood, measles, whooping-cough, and
scarlet fever, we must fight the disease from inside the individual;
that is, make as nearly impregnable as possible the natural
fortifications of the body to resist and repel the invasion. That is
what school medical inspection aims at.”

“You wouldn’t rank whooping-cough and measles with scarlet fever, would
you?” said Mrs. Sharpless incredulously.

“Why not? Although scarlet fever has the worst after-effects,—though
not much more serious than those of measles,—the three are almost equal
so far as the death-rate is concerned.”

“Surely not!” protested the old lady. “Why, I’d rather have measles in
the house ten times, or whooping-cough either, than scarlet fever
once.”

“You’re about ten times as likely to have.”

She looked puzzled. “But what did you mean by saying that one of ‘em is
as bad as the other?”

“That it’s as dangerous to the community, though not to the
individual.”

“Just a little deep for me, too,” confessed Mr. Clyde.

“Yet it’s perfectly simple. Here, take an example. Would you rather be
bitten by a rattlesnake or a mosquito?”

“A mosquito, of course.”

“Naturally. Yet a rattlesnake country is a good deal safer than a
mosquito country. You wouldn’t hesitate, on account of your health, to
move to Arizona, where rattlesnakes live?”

“I suppose not.”

“But you _would_ be afraid to establish your family in the malarious
swamps of the South?”

“Certainly.”

“Well, people who die of malaria die of mosquito bite, since the
mosquito is the only agency of infection. Thus, it reduces to this:
that while the individual rattler is more dangerous than the individual
mosquito, the mosquito, in general, kills her thousands where the snake
kills one. Now—with considerable modification of the ratio—scarlet
fever is the rattlesnake; whooping-cough and measles are the
mosquitoes. It is just as important to keep measles out of a community
as it is to shut out scarlet fever. In fact, if you will study the
records of this city, you will find that in two out of the last three
years, measles has killed more people than scarlet fever, and
whooping-cough more than either of them.”

“What are we going to do about it?” asked the practical-minded Mr.
Clyde.

“Ah, if some one would only tell us that! In measles the worst of the
harm is done before the disease announces itself definitely. The most
contagious stage is previous to the appearance of the telltale rash.
There’s nothing but a snuffling nose, and perhaps a very little fever
to give advance notice that the sufferer is a firebrand.”

“Well, you can’t shut a child out of school for every little sore
throat,” observed Mrs. Sharpless.

“As to that I’m not so sure,” replied the physician slowly and
thoughtfully. “A recent writer on school epidemics has suggested
educating the public to believe that every sore throat is contagious.”

“That isn’t true, is it?” asked Mr. Clyde.

“No. Personally I believe that, while a physician is often justified in
deceiving his patient, he is never justified in fooling the public. In
the long run they find him out and his influence for good is lessened.
Yet that sore-throat theory is near enough true to be a strong
temptation. Every sore throat is suspicious; that isn’t too much to
say. And, with a thorough school-inspection system, it is quite
possible that epidemics could be headed off by isolating the
early-discovered cases of sore throat. But, an epidemic of the common
contagions, once well under way, seems to be quite beyond any certainty
of control.”

“Do you mean to say that quarantine and disinfection and isolation are
all useless?” asked Mr. Clyde.

“No. I won’t go as far as that. They may exercise a check in some
cases. But I will say this: that all our cumbersome and expensive and
often harassing hygienic measures in the contagious diseases haven’t
made good. Obviously, if they had, we should see a diminution of the
ills which they are supposed to limit. There is no diminution. No,
we’re on the wrong tack. Until we know what the right tack is, we
perhaps ought to keep on doing what we can in the present line. It’s a
big, complicated subject, and one that won’t be settled until we find
out what scarlet fever, measles, and whooping-cough really are, and
what causes them. While we’re waiting for the bacteriologist to tell us
that, the soundest principle of defense that we have is to keep the
body up to its highest pitch of resistance. That is why I support
medical inspection for schools as an essential measure.”

“To repair the children without closing the schools, if I may modify
Dr. Goler’s epigram,” suggested Mr. Clyde.

“Exactly. Eventually we shall have to build as well as repair. A very
curious thing is happening to Young America in the Eastern States. The
growing generation is shrinking in weight and height.”

“Which is almost contradictory enough for a paradox,” remarked Mr.
Clyde.

“It’s a melancholy and literal fact. You know, there’s a height and
weight basis for age upon which our school grading system rests. The
authorities have been obliged to reconstruct it because the children
are continuously growing smaller for their years. _There’s_ work for
the inspection force!”

“You’d put the children on pulleys and stretch ‘em out, I suppose!”
gibed Grandma Sharpless.

“That might work, too,” replied the doctor, unruffled. “The Procrustean
system isn’t so bad, if old Procrustes had only sent his victims to the
gymnasium instead of putting them to bed. Yes, a quarter of an hour
with the weight-pulleys every day would help undersized kiddies a good
deal. But principally I should want the school-inspectors to keep the
youngsters playing.”

“You don’t have to teach a child to play,” sniffed Grandma Sharpless,
with womanly scorn of mere man’s views concerning children.

“Pardon me, Mrs. Sharpless, you taught your children to play.”

“I! Whatever makes you think that?”

“The simple fact that they didn’t die in babyhood.”

Mrs. Sharpless looked at him with a severity not unmingled with
suspicion. “Sometimes, young man,” she observed, “you talk like a—a—a
gump!”

“Take that, Strong!” said Mr. Clyde, joining in the doctor’s laugh
against himself.

“Facts may sometimes sound foolish,” admitted Dr. Strong. “If they do,
that’s the fault of the speaker. And it _is_ a fact that every mother
teaches her baby to play. Watch the cat if you don’t believe me. The
wisest woman in America points out in her recent book that it is the
mother’s playing with her baby which rouses in it the will to live.
Without that will to live none of us would survive.”

“I don’t know who your wisest woman in America may be, but I don’t
believe she knows what she is talking about,” declared Grandma
Sharpless flatly.

“I’ve never known her when she didn’t,” retorted the doctor. “If Jane
Addams of Hull House isn’t an expert in life, mental, moral, and
physical, then there’s no such person! Why, see here, Mrs. Sharpless;
do you know why a baby’s chance of survival is less in the very best
possible institution without its mother, than in the very worst
imaginable tenement with its mother, even though the mother is unable
to nurse it?”

“It isn’t as well tended, I expect.”

“All its physical surroundings are a thousand times more advantageous:
better air, better food, better temperature, better safeguarding
against disease; yet babies in these surroundings just pine away and
die. It’s almost impossible to bring up an infant on an institutional
system. The infant death-rate of these well-meaning places is so
appalling that nobody dares tell it publicly. And it is so, simply
because there is no one to play with the babies. The nurses haven’t the
time, though they have the instinct. I tell you, the most wonderful,
mystic, profound thing in all the world, to me, is the sight of a young
girl’s intuitive yearning to dandle every baby she may see. That’s the
universal world-old, world-wide, deep-rooted genius of motherhood,
which antedates the humankind, stirring within her and impelling her to
help keep the race alive—by playing with the baby.”

“H’m! I hadn’t thought of it in that way,” confessed Grandma Sharpless.
“There may be something in what you say, young man. But by the time
children reach school age I guess they’ve learned that lesson.”

“Not always. At least, not properly, always. Let’s consult the
Committee on School of our household organization.”

He sent for eight-year-old Julia.

“Question to lay before you, Miss Chairwoman,” said Dr. Strong. “How
many of the girls in your grade hang around the hall or doorways during
recess?”

“Oh, lots!” said Julia promptly.

“Are they the bigger girls? or the smaller ones?” The Committee on
School considered the matter gravely. “Mary Hinks, she’s tall, but
she’s awful thin and sickly,” she pronounced. “Dot Griswold and Cora
Smith and Tiny Warley—why, I guess they’re most all the littlest girls
in the class.”

Dr. Strong nodded. “Sure to be the undernourished, anaemic, lethargic
ones,” said he. “They’re forgetting the lessons of their babyhood.
Insensibly they are losing the will to live. But there’s nobody to tell
them so. A thorough medical inspection service would correct that. It
would include school-nurses who would go to the homes of the children
and tell the parents what was the matter. Such a system might not be
warranted to keep epidemics out of our schools, but it would stretch
out and fill out those meager youngsters’ brains as well as bodies, and
fit them to combat illness if it did come. The whole theory of the
school’s attitude toward the child seems to me misconceived by those
who have charge of the system. It assumes too much in authority and
avoids too much in responsibility.

“Take the case of John Smith, who has two children to bring up under
our enlightened system of government. Government says to John Smith,
‘Send your children to school!’ ‘Suppose I don’t wish to?’ says John
Smith. ‘You’ve got to,’ says Government. ‘It isn’t safe for me to have
them left uneducated.’ ‘Will you take care of them while they’re at
school?’ says John Smith. ‘I’ll train their minds,’ says Government.
‘What about their bodies?’ says John Smith. ‘Hm!’ says Government;
‘that’s a horse of another color.’ ‘Then I’ll come with them and see
that they’re looked after physically,’ says John Smith. ‘You _will_
not!’ says Government. ‘I’m _in loco ‘parentis_, while they’re in
school.’ ‘Then you take the entire _loco_ of the _parentis_,’ says John
Smith. ‘If you take my children away on the ground that you’re better
fitted to care for their minds than I am, you ought to be at least as
ready to look after their health. Otherwise,’ says John Smith, ‘go and
teach yourself to stand on your head. You can’t teach _my_ children.’
Now,” concluded Dr. Strong, “do you see any flaws in the Smith point of
view?”

“Just plain common sense,” approved Grandma Sharpless.

“Clyde,” said Dr. Strong, with a twinkle, “if you don’t stop rubbing a
hole in your chin, I’ll have to repair _you_. What’s preying on your
mind?”

“I am trying,” replied Mr. Clyde deliberately, “to figure out, with
reference to the School Superintendent and myself, just how a man who
has made a fool of himself can write a letter to another man who has
helped the first man make a fool of himself, admitting that he’s made a
fool of himself, and yet avoid embarrassment, either to the man who has
made a fool of himself or to the other man who aided the man in making
a fool of himself. Do you get that?”

Dr. Strong rose. “I’m a Chinese doctor,” he observed, “not a Chinese
puzzle-solver. That’s a matter between you and your ink-well. Meantime,
having attained the point for which I’ve been climbing, I now declare
this session adjourned.”




IV.
THE CORNER DRUG-STORE


“No, it won’t add to the attractiveness of the neighborhood, perhaps,”
said Mrs. Clyde thoughtfully. “But how convenient it will be!”

Mr. Clyde had come home with the news that a drug-store was to be
opened shortly on the adjacent corner. Shifting his position to dodge a
foliage-piercing shaft of sunlight—they were all sitting out on the
shady lawn, in the cool of a September afternoon—Dr. Strong shook his
head.

“Too convenient, altogether,” he observed.

“How’s that?” queried Mr. Clyde. “A drugstore is like a gun in Texas:
you may not need it often, but when you do need it, you need it like
blazes.”

“True enough. But most people over-patronize the drug-store.”

“Not this family; at least, since our house-doctor came to keep us well
on the Chinese plan,” said Mrs. Clyde gracefully.

But Dr. Strong only looked rueful. “Your Chinese doctor has to plead
guilty to negligence of what has been going on under his very nose.”

“Oh, not more trouble!” pleaded Mrs. Clyde. She had come through the
dreaded ordeal of little Betty’s operation for adenoids—which had
proved to be, after all, so slight and comparatively painless—with a
greatly augmented respect for and trust in Dr. Strong; but her nerves
still quivered.

“Nothing to trouble you,” the doctor assured her, “but enough to make
me feel guilty—and stupid. Have you noticed any change in Manny,
lately?”

“Manny” was fourteen-year-old Maynard Clyde, the oldest of the
children; a high school lad, tall, lathy, athletic, and good-tempered.

“The boy is as nervous as a witch,” put in Grandma Sharpless. “I’ve
noticed it since early summer.”

“Then I wish you had taught me my trade,” said Dr. Strong. “Manny is so
husky and active that I’ve hardly given him a thought.”

“Well, what’s wrong with him?” asked the father anxiously.

“Too much drug-store,” was the prompt reply. “Not drugs!” cried Mrs.
Clyde, horrified. “That child!”

“Well, no; not in the sense you mean it. Wait; there he is now. Manny!”
he called, raising his voice. “Come over here a minute, will you?” The
boy ambled over, and dropped down on the grass. He was brown, thin, and
hard-trained; but there was a nervous pucker between his eyes, which
his father noted for the first time. “What’s this? A meeting of the
Board? Anything for the Committee on Milk Supply to do?” he asked.

“Not at present,” answered Dr. Strong, “except to answer a question or
two. You don’t drink coffee, do you?”

“Of course not. I’m trying for shortstop on the junior nine, you know.”

“How are you making out?”

“Rotten!” said the boy despondently. “I don’t seem to have any grip on
myself this year. Sort o’ get the rattles.”

“Hm-m-m. Feel pretty thirsty after the practice, and usually stop in at
the soda-fountain for some of those patent soft drinks advertised to be
harmless but stimulating, don’t you?”

“Yes,” said the boy, surprised.

“Ah,” said the doctor carelessly; “three or four glasses a day, I
suppose?”

Manny thought a moment. “All of that,” he said.

“Well, you quit it,” advised the doctor, “if you want to make the ball
team. It will put you off your game worse than tea or coffee. Tell the
athletic instructor I said so, will you?”

“Sure!” said the boy. “I didn’t know there was any harm in it.”

As Manny walked away, Dr. Strong turned to

Mr. Clyde. “I found out about Manny by accident. No wonder the boy is
nervous. He’s been drinking that stuff like water, with no thought of
what’s in it.”

“What _is_ in it?” said Mrs. Clyde.

“Caffeine, generally. The most widely used of the lot is a mixture of
fruit syrups doctored up with that drug. There’s as much
nerve-excitation in a glass of it—yes, and more—than in a cup of strong
coffee. What would you think of a fourteen-year-old boy who drank five
cups of strong coffee every day?”

“I’d think his parents were fools,” declared Grandma Sharpless bluntly.

“Or his physician,” suggested Dr. Strong. “I’ve seen cases of people
drinking twenty to twenty-five glasses of that ‘harmless’ stuff every
day. Of course, they were on the road to nervous smash-up. But the
craving for it was established and they hadn’t the nerve to stop.”

“The soda-fountain as a public peril,” said Mr. Clyde, with a smile.

“There’s more in that than can be smiled away,” retorted the doctor
vigorously. “What between nerve-foods that are simply disguised
‘bracers,’ and dangerous, heart-depressing dopes, like bromo-seltzer,
the soda-fountain does its share of damage in the community.”

“What about soda-water; that is innocent, isn’t it?” asked Mrs. Clyde.

“Yes. If the syrups are pure, soda-water is a good thing in moderation.
So are the mineral waters. But there is this to be said about
soda-water and candy, particularly the latter—”

“I’ve always said,” broke in Grandma Sharpless, “that candy-eating
would ruin any digestion.”, “Then you’ve always been wrong, ma’am,”
said Dr. Strong. “Candy, well and honestly made, is excellent food at
the proper time. The trouble is, both with candy and with the heavy,
rich soda-waters, that people are continually filling up with them
between meals. Now the stomach is a machine with a great amount of work
to do, and is entitled to some consideration. Clyde, what would happen
to the machines in your factory, if you didn’t give them proper
intervals of rest?”

“They’d be very short-lived,” said Mr. Clyde. “There’s a curious thing
about machinery which everybody knows but nobody understands: running a
machine twenty-four hours a day for one week gives it harder wear than
running it twelve hours a day for a month. It needs a regular rest.”

“So with the machinery of digestion,” said the doctor. “The stomach and
intestines have their hard work after meals. How are they to rest up,
if an odd lot of candy or a slab of rich ice-cream soda come sliding
down between whiles to be attended to? Eat your candy at the end of a
meal, if you want it. It’s a good desert. But whatever you eat, give
your digestion a fair chance.”

“You can digest anything if you use Thingumbob Pills,” observed Mr.
Clyde sardonically. “The newspapers say so.”

“That’s the kind of doctrine that makes dyspeptics,” returned Dr.
Strong. “The American stomach is the worst-abused organ in creation.
Saliva is the true digestive. If people would take time to chew
properly, half the dyspepsia-pill fakers would go out of business. If
they’d take time to exercise properly, the other half would disappear.”

“Liver pills were my regular dependence a few years ago,” remarked Mr.
Clyde. “Since I took up hand-ball I haven’t needed them. But I suppose
that half the business men in town think they couldn’t live without
drugging themselves two or three times a week.”

“Undoubtedly. Tell the average American any sort of a lie in print,
about his digestion, and he’ll swallow it whole, together with the drug
which the lie is intended to sell. Look at the Cascaret advertising.
Its tendency is to induce, not an occasional recourse to Cascarets, but
a steady use of them. Any man foolish enough to follow the advice of
the advertisements would form a Cascaret habit and bring his digestion
into a state of slavery. That sort of appeal has probably ruined more
digestions and spoiled more tempers than any devil-dogma ever put into
type.”

“Castor-oil is good enough for me,” said Grandma Sharpless
emphatically.

“It’s good enough for anybody—that is to say, bad enough and nasty
enough so that there isn’t much danger of its being abused. But these
infernal sugar-coated candy cathartics get a hold on a man’s intestinal
organization so that it can’t do its work without ‘em, and, Lord knows,
it can’t stand their stimulus indefinitely. Then along comes
appendicitis.”

“But some of the laxative medicines advertise to prevent appendicitis,”
said Mrs. Clyde.

Dr. Strong’s face was very grim. “Yes, they advertise. Commercial
travelers, because of their irregular habits, are great pill-guzzlers
as a class. Appendicitis is a very common complaint among them. A
Pittsburgh surgeon with a large practice among traveling men has kept
records, and he believes that more than fifty per cent of the
appendicitis cases he treats are caused by the ‘liver-pill’ and
‘steady-cathartic’ habit. He explains his theory in this way. The man
begins taking the laxative to correct his bad habits of life. Little by
little he increases his dose, as the digestive mechanism grows less
responsive to the stimulus, until presently an overdose sets his
intestines churning around with a violence never intended by nature.
Then, under this abnormal peristalsis, as it is called, the appendix
becomes infected, and there’s nothing for it but the surgeon’s knife.”

“Would you have people run to the doctor and pay two dollars every time
their stomach got a little out of kilter?” asked Mrs. Sharpless
shrewdly.

“Run to the doctor; run to the minister; run to the plumber; run
anywhere so long as you run far enough and fast enough,” answered Dr.
Strong with a smile. “A mile a day at a good clip, or three miles of
brisk walking would be the beginning of a readjustment. Less food more
slowly eaten and no strong liquors would complete the cure in nine
cases out of ten. The tenth case needs the doctor; not the
newspaper-and-drug-store pill.”

“But all patent medicines aren’t bad, are they?” asked Mrs. Clyde.
“Some have very good testimonials.”

“Bought or wheedled. Any medicine which claims to _cure_ is a fraud and
a swindle.”

“Don’t tell me, young man!” said Grandma Sharpless. “You doctors are
prejudiced against patent medicines, but we old folks have used ‘em
long enough to know which are good and which are bad. Now I don’t claim
but what the Indian herb remedies and the ‘ready reliefs’ and that lot
are frauds. But my family was brought up on teething powders and
soothing syrups.”

“Then you’re fortunate,” said Dr. Strong sternly, “that none of them
has turned out to be an opium fiend.”

The instant he said it, he saw, with sharp regret, that his shaft had
sped true to the mark. The clear, dark red of a hale old age faded from
Grandma Sharpless’s cheeks. Mr. Clyde shot a quick glance of warning at
him.

“And speaking of Indian remedies,” went on the doctor glibly, “I
remember as a boy—”

“Stop a minute,” said Grandma Sharpless steadily. “The truth isn’t
going to hurt me. Or, if it does hurt, maybe it’s right it should. I
had a younger brother who died in a sanitarium for drug-habit when he
was twenty-four. As a child he pretty nearly lived on soothing syrups;
had to have them all the time, because he was such a nervous little
fellow; always having earache and stomach-ache, until he was eight or
nine years old. Then he got better and became a strong, active boy, and
a robust man. After his college course he went to Philadelphia, and was
doing well when he contracted the morphine habit—how or why, we never
knew. It killed him in three years. Do you think—is it possible that
the soothing syrups—I’ve heard they have morphine in them—had anything
to do with his ruin?”

“Why, Mrs. Sharpless,” said the other, very gently, “I can only put it
before you in this way. Here is one of the most subtle and enslaving of
all drugs, morphine. It is fed to a child, in the plastic and formative
years of life, regularly. What surer way could there be of planting the
seeds of drug-habit? Suppose, for illustration, we substitute alcohol,
which is far less dangerous. If you gave a child, from the time of his
second year to his eighth, let us say, two or three drinks of whiskey
every day, and that child, when grown up, developed into a drunkard,
would you think it strange?”

“I’d think it strange if he didn’t.”

“Apply the same logic to opium, or its derivative, morphine. There are
a dozen preparations regularly used for children, containing opium, or
morphine, such as Mrs. Winslow’s ‘Soothing Syrup,’ and Kopp’s ‘Baby
Friend.’ This is well known, and it is also a recognized fact that the
morphine and opium habit is steadily increasing in this country. Isn’t
it reasonable to infer a connection between the two? Further, some of
the highest authorities believe that the use of these drugs in
childhood predisposes to the drink habit also, later in life. The
nerves are unsettled; they are habituated to a morbid craving, and, at
a later period, that craving is liable to return in a changed
manifestation.”

“But a drug-store can’t sell opium or morphine except on prescription,
can it?” asked Mr. Clyde.

“It can _in a patent medicine_,” replied the doctor. “That’s one of the
ugly phases of the drug business. Yet it’s possible to find honest
people who believe in these dopes and even give testimonials to them.”

“Some testimonials are hard to believe,” said Mrs. Clyde, thankfully
accepting the chance to shift the conversation to a less painful phase
of the topic. “Old Mrs. Dibble in our church is convinced that she owes
her health to Hall’s Catarrh Cure.” Dr. Strong smiled sardonically.
“That’s the nostrum which offers one hundred dollars reward for any
case it can’t cure; and when a disgusted dupe tried to get the one
hundred dollars, they said he hadn’t given their remedy a sufficient
trial: he’d taken only twenty-odd bottles. So your friend thinks that a
useless mixture of alcohol and iodide of potassium fixed her, does
she?”

“Why shouldn’t she? She had a case of catarrh. She took three bottles
of the medicine, and her catarrh is all gone.”

“All right. Let’s extend her line of reasoning to some other cases.
While old Mr. Barker, around on Halsey Street, was very ill with
pneumonia last month, he fell out of bed and broke his arm.”

“In two places,” said Mrs. Sharpless. “I saw him walking up the street
yesterday, all trussed up like a chicken.”

“Quite recovered from pneumonia, however. Then there was little Mrs.
Bowles: she had typhoid, you remember, and at the height of the fever a
strange cat got into the room and frightened her into hysterics.”

“But she got well,” said Mrs. Clyde. “They’re up in the woods now.”

“Exactly. Moral (according to Mrs. Dibble’s experience with Hall’s
Catarrh Cure): for pneumonia, try a broken arm; in case of typhoid, set
a cat on the patient.”

Mr. Clyde laughed. “I see,” he said. “People get well in spite of these
patent medicines, rather than by virtue of them. _Post hoc, non propter
hoc_, as our lawyer friends say.”

“You’ve got it. The human body keeps up a sort of drug-store of its
own. As soon as disease fastens on it, it goes to work in a subtle and
mysterious way, manufacturing a cure for that disease. If it’s
diphtheria, the body produces antitoxin, and we give it more to help it
on. If it’s jaundice, it produces a special quality of gastric juices
to correct the evil conditions. In the vast majority of attacks, the
body drives out the disease by its own efforts; yet, if the patient
chances to have been idiot enough to take some quack ‘cure’ the credit
goes to that medicine.”

“Or to the doctor, if it’s a doctor’s case,” suggested Grandma
Sharpless, with a twinkle of malice.

“Show me a doctor who boasts ‘I can cure you,’ whether by word of mouth
or in print, and I’ll show you a quack,” returned the other warmly.

“But what is a doctor for in a sick-room, if not to cure?” asked Mrs.
Clyde.

“What is a captain for on a ship?” countered Dr. Strong. “He can’t cure
a storm, can he? But he can guide the vessel so that she can weather
it. Well, our medical captains lose a good many commands; the storm is
often too severe for human skill. But they save a good many, too, by
skillful handling.”

“Then there is no such thing as an actual cure, in medicine?”

“Why, yes. In a sense there are several. Antitoxin may be called a cure
for diphtheria. Quinine is, to some extent, a specific in malaria. And
Ehrlich’s famous ‘606’ has been remarkably, though not unfailingly,
successful in that terrible blood-plague, born of debauchery, which
strikes the innocent through the guilty. All these remedies, however,
come, not through the quack and the drug-store, but through the
physician and the laboratory.”

“May not the patent medicines, also, help to guide the physical ship
through the storm?” asked Mrs. Clyde, adopting the doctor’s simile.

“On to the rocks,” he replied quickly. “Look at the consumption cures.
To many consumptives, alcohol is deadly. Yet a wretched concoction like
Duffy’s Malt Whiskey, advertised to cure tuberculosis, flaunts its lies
everywhere. And the law is powerless to check the suicidal course of
the poor fools who believe and take it.”

“Why, I thought the Pure Food Law stopped all that,” said Mrs. Clyde
innocently.

“The Pure Food Law! The life has been almost crushed out of it.
Roosevelt whacked it over the head with his Referee Board, which
granted immunity to the food poisoners, and afterward the Supreme Court
and Wickersham treated it to a course of ‘legal interpretations,’ which
generally signify a way to get around a good law.”

“But the patent medicines aren’t allowed to make false claims any more,
as I understand it,” said Mr. Clyde.

“That applies only to the label on the bottle. So you’ll find that the
words ‘alcohol,’ ‘opium,’ ‘acetanilid,’ ‘chloral,’ and other terms of
poison, have sprouted forth there, in very small and inconspicuous
type. But there’s a free field for the false promises on sign-boards,
in the street-cars, in the newspapers, everywhere. Look in the next
drug-store window you pass and you’ll see ‘sure cures’ exploited in
terms that would make Ananias feel like an amateur.”

“You make out a pretty poor character for the druggists, as a class,”
observed Mr. Clyde.

“Not at all. As a class, they’re a decent, self-respecting, honorable
lot of men.”

“Then why do they stick to a bad trade?” asked Mrs. Clyde.

Dr. Strong got to his feet. “Let one of them answer,” he said. “Mr.
Gormley, who runs the big store in the Arcade, usually passes here
about this time, and I think I see him coming now.”

“They can talk all they like,” said Grandma Sharpless emphatically, as
the doctor walked across to the front fence, “but I wouldn’t be without
a bottle of cough syrup in the house.”

“Nor I without my headache tablets,” added Mrs. Clyde. “I’d have had to
give up the bridge party yesterday but for them.”

Mr. Clyde shot a sharp glance, first, at his wife, then at her mother.
“Well, I’d like to see the labels on your particular brands of
medicine,” he remarked.

“There’s nothing bad in mine,” asserted Mrs. Clyde. “Mrs. Martin
recommended them to me; she’s been taking them for years.”

At this point Dr. Strong returned, bringing with him a slim, elderly
man, whose shrewd, wide eyes peered through a pair of gold-rimmed
glasses.

“So you want me to give away the secrets of my trade,” he remarked
good-humoredly, after the greetings. “Well, I don’t object to relieving
my mind, once in a while. So shoot, and if I can’t dodge, I’ll yell.”

“Why do you deal in patent medicines if they’re so bad?” asked Grandma
Sharpless bluntly. “Is there such a big profit in them?”

“No profit, worth speaking of,” replied Mr. Gormley. “Though you’ll
note that I haven’t admitted they are bad—as yet.”

“The bulk of your trade is in that class of goods, isn’t it?” queried
Mr. Clyde.

“Worse luck, it is. They’ve got us through their hold on the public.
And they not only force us to be their agents, but they grind us down
to the very smallest profit; sometimes less than the cost of doing
business.”

“But you aren’t compelled to deal in their medicines,” objected Mr.
Clyde.

“Practically I am. My really profitable trade is in filling
prescriptions. There I can legitimately charge, not only for the drugs,
but also for my special technical skill and knowledge. But in order to
maintain my prescription trade I must keep people coming to my store.
And they won’t come unless I carry what they demand in the way of
patent medicines.”

“Then there is a legitimate demand for patent medicines?” said Mr.
Clyde quickly.

“Legitimate? Hardly. It’s purely an inspired demand.”

“What makes it persist, then?”

“The newspapers. The patent-medicine advertisers fill the daily columns
with their claims, and create a demand by the force of repeated
falsehood. Do you know the universal formula for the cost of patent
cures? Here it is: Drugs, 3 per cent; manufacturing plant, 7 per cent;
printing ink, 90 per cent. It’s a sickening business. If I could afford
it, I’d break loose like that fellow McConnell in Chicago and put a
placard of warning in my show window. Here’s a copy of the one he
displays in his drug-store.”

Taking a card from his pocket, Mr. Gormley held it up for the circle to
read. The inscription was:—

“Please do not ask us what _any old patent, medicine_ is worth, for you
embarrass us, as our honest answer must be that _it is worthless_.
    “If you mean to ask us at what price we sell it, that is an
    entirely different proposition. When sick, consult a good
    physician. It is the only proper course. And you will find it
    cheaper in the end than self-medication with _worthless ‘patent’
    nostrums._”


“Has that killed his trade in quackery?” asked Dr. Strong.

“Nothing can kill that. It has cut it down by half, though. It’s a
peculiar and disheartening fact that the public will believe the paid
lie of a newspaper advertisement and disregard the plain truth from an
expert. And see here, Dr. Strong, when you doctors get together and
roast the pharmaceutical trade, just remember that it’s really the
newspapers and not the drug-stores that sell patent medicines.”

“Are all of them so bad?” asked Mrs. Clyde.

“All that claim to _cure_. They’re either frauds, appealing to the
appetite by a stiff allowance of booze, like Swamp Root and Peruna, or
disguised dopes,—opium, hasheesh or chloral,—masquerading as soothing
syrups, cough medicines, and consumption cures; or artificial devices
for giving yourself heart disease by the use of coal-tar chemicals in
the headache powders and anti-pain pills.”

“Well, you can’t make me believe, Mr. Drug-man,” said Grandma Sharpless
with a belligerent shake of her head, “that a patent medicine which
keeps on being in demand for years, on its own merits, hasn’t something
good in it.”

“No, ma’am, I can’t,” agreed the visitor. “I wouldn’t want to. There
isn’t any such patent medicine.”

“There’s hundreds of ‘em,” contradicted the old lady, with the
exaggeration of the disputant who finds the ground dropping away from
underfoot.

“Not that sell on their own merits. Advertising and more advertising
and still more advertising is all that does it. Let any one of them
drop out of the newspapers and off the bill-boards, and the demand for
it would be dead in a year.”

“Yet, as a student of business conditions,” said Mr. Clyde, “I’m
inclined to side with Mrs. Sharpless and believe that any line of goods
which has come down from yesterday to to-day must have some merit.”

The druggist took off his glasses, wiped them and waved them in the
air, with a flourish.

And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death,


he quoted sonorously. “We think ourselves heirs to the wisdom of the
ages, without stopping to consider that we’re heirs to the foolishness,
also. We’re gulled by the printed lie about Doan’s Kidney Pills, just
as our fathers were by the cart-tail oratory of the itinerant quack who
sold the ‘Wonderful Indian Secrets of Life’ at one dollar per bottle.”

“Well, I hesitate to admit it,” said Mrs. Clyde, with a little laugh,
“but we always have a few of the old remedies about.”

“Suppose you name some of them over,” suggested the druggist.

“Usually I keep some One-Night Cough Cure in the house. That’s
harmless, isn’t it?”

The druggist glanced at Dr. Strong, and they both grinned.

“It _might_ be harmless,” said the druggist mildly, “if it didn’t
contain both morphine and hasheesh.”

“Goodness!” said Mrs. Clyde, horrified. “How could one suppose—”

“By reading the label carefully,” interjected Dr. Strong. “Anything
else?”

“Let me think. I’ve always considered Jayne’s Expectorant good for the
children when they have a cold.”

“Tastes differ,” observed the druggist philosophically. “I wouldn’t
consider opium good for _my_ children inside or outside of any
expectorant. Next!”

“But the names _sound_ so innocent!” cried Mrs. Clyde. “I’m almost
afraid to tell any more. But we always have Rexall Cholera Cure on
hand.”

“Had much cholera in the house lately?” inquired the druggist, with an
affectation of extreme interest.

“Of course it’s only for stomach-ache,” explained Mrs. Clyde. “It
certainly does cure the pain.”

“Not cure,—drug it into unconsciousness,” amended Mr. Gormley. “The
opium in it does that. Rather a heroic remedy, opium, for a little
stomach-ache, don’t you think?”

“What have you got to say against Kohler’s One-Night Cough Cure that I
always keep by me?” demanded Grandma Sharpless.

Mr. Gormley beamed on her in deprecatory good nature. “Who? Me?
Gracious! I’ve got nothing to say against it worse than it says against
itself, on its label. Morphine, chloroform, and hasheesh. What more
_is_ there to say?”

“How long has this house been full of assorted poisons?” asked Mr.
Clyde suddenly of his wife.

“Now, Tom,” she protested. “I’ve always been careful about using them
for the children. Personally, I never touch patent medicines.”

But at this her mother, smarting under their caller’s criticism of her
cough syrup, turned on her.

“What do you call those headache tablets you take?”

“Those? They aren’t a patent medicine. They’re Anti-kamnia, a
physician’s prescription.”

“Yes; a fine prescription they are!” said the druggist. “Did you ever
read the Anti-kamnia booklet? For whole-souled, able-bodied,
fore-and-aft, up-and-down stairs professional lying, it has got most of
the patent medicines relegated to the infant class. Harmless, they say!
I’ve seen a woman take two of those things and hardly get out of the
door before they got in their fine work on her heart and over she went
like a shot rabbit.”

“Not dead!”

“No; but it was touch and go with her.”

“What’s in that; opium, too?” asked Mr. Clyde.

“No; a coal-tar chemical which puts a clamp on the heart action. One or
another of the coal-tar drugs is in all the headache powders. There’s a
long list of deaths from them, not to mention cases of drug-habit.”

“Habit?” cried Mrs. Clyde. “Do you mean I’m in danger of not being able
to get along without the tablets?”

“If you take them steadily you certainly are. If you take them
occasionally, you’re only in danger of dropping dead one of these
days.”

Mr. Clyde’s chin abruptly assumed a prominence which he seldom
permitted it. “Well, that settles _that_,” he observed; and it was
entirely unnecessary for any one present to ask any amplification of
the remark. Mrs. Clyde looked at her mother for sympathy—and didn’t get
any.

“Whenever I see a woman come into the shop,” continued the druggist,
“with a whitey-blue complexion and little gray’ flabby wrinkles under
her eyes, I know without asking what _she_ wants. She’s a
headache-powder fiend.”

“That queer look they have is from deterioration of the blood,” said
Dr. Strong. “The acetanilid or acetphenetidin or whatever the coal-tar
derivative may be, seems to kill the red corpuscles. In extreme cases
of this I’ve seen blood the color of muddy water.”

“It certainly makes a fright of a woman. ‘Orangeine’ gets a lot of ‘em.
You’ ve seen its advertisements in the street-cars. The owner of
Orangeine, a Chicago man, got the habit himself: used fairly to live on
the stuff, until pop! went his heart. He’s a living, or, rather a dead
illustration of what his own dope will do.”

“But what are you to do for a splitting headache?” queried Mrs. Clyde,
turning to Dr. Strong.

“I don’t know, unless I know what causes it,” said Dr. Strong.
“Headache isn’t a disease. It’s a symptom, a danger signal. It’s the
body’s way of crying for help. Drugs don’t cure a headache. They simply
interrupt it.”

“What with the headache-powders breeding the drug habit, and the
consumption cures and cough medicines making dope fiends, and the malt
whiskey cures and Perunas furnishing quiet joy to the temperance trade,
I sometimes wonder what we’re coming to,” remarked Mr. Gormley.

Mr. Clyde rubbed his chin thoughtfully. “But poor people who can’t
afford a doctor have no recourse but to patent medicines,” said he.

“Can’t afford a doctor!” exclaimed Dr. Strong. “Why, don’t you know
that nostrum-taking is the most expensive form of treatment? Did you
ever happen to see A. B. Frost’s powerful cartoon called ‘Her Last
Dollar’? A woman, thin, bent, and ravaged with disease, is buying,
across the counter of a country store, a bottle of some kind of ‘sure
cure,’ from the merchant, who serves her with a smile, half-pitying,
half-cynical, while her two ragged children, with hunger and hope in
their pinched faces, gaze wistfully at the food in the glass cases.
There’s the whole tragedy of a wasted life in that picture. ‘Her Last
Dollar!’ That’s what the patent medicine is after. A doctor at least
_tries_ to cure. But the patent medicine shark’s policy is to keep the
sufferer buying as long as there is a dollar left to buy with. Why, a
nostrum that advertises heavily has got to sell six bottles or seven to
each victim before the cost of catching that victim is defrayed. After
that, the profits. Since you’ve brought up the matter of expense, I’ll
give you an instance from your own household, Clyde.”

“Here! What’s this?” cried Mr. Clyde, sitting up straight. “More patent
dosing?”

“One of the servants,—Maggie, the nurse. I’ve got her whole medical
history and she’s a prime example of the Dupe’s Progress. She’s run the
gamut of fake cures.”

“Something must have been the matter with her to start her off,
though,” said Mr. Clyde.

“That’s the joke—or would be if it weren’t pathetic. She started out by
having headaches. Not knowing any better, she took headache-powders.”

“One for you, Myra,” remarked Mr. Clyde to his wife, in an aside.

“Bad heart action and difficulty in breathing—the natural result—scared
her into the belief that she had heart trouble. Impetus was given to
this notion by an advertisement which she found in a weekly, a
religious weekly (God save the mark!), advising her not to drop dead of
heart disease. To avoid this awful fate, which was illustrated by a
sprightly sketch of a man falling flat on the sidewalk, she was
earnestly implored to try Kinsman’s heart remedy. She did so, and, of
course, got worse, since the ‘remedy’ was merely a swindle. About this
time Maggie’s stomach began to ‘act up,’ partly from the medicines,
partly from the original trouble which caused her headaches.”

“You haven’t told us what that was, Strong,” remarked Mr. Clyde.

“Later. Maggie now developed catarrh of the stomach, superinduced by
reading one of old Dr. Hartman’s Peruna ads. She took seven bottles of
Peruna, and it cheered her up quite a bit—temporarily and
alcoholically.”

“Then it was _that_ that I smelled on her breath. And I accused her of
drinking,” said Mrs. Clyde remorsefully.

“So she had been; raw alcohol, flavored with a little caramel and
doctored up with a few drugs. Toward the close of her Peruna career,
her stomach became pretty sensitive. Also, as she wasn’t accustomed to
strong liquor, her kidneys were affected somewhat. In her daily paper
she read a clarion call from Dr. Kilmer of the Swamp Root swindle (the
real Dr. Kilmer quit Swamp Root to become a cancer quack, by the way),
which seemed to her to diagnose her case exactly. So she ‘tanked up’
some more on that brand of intoxicant. Since she was constantly
drugging herself, the natural resistance of her body was weakened, and
she got a bad cold. The cough scared her almost to death; or rather,
the consumption cure advertisements which she took to reading did; and
she spent a few dollars on the fake factory which turns out Dr. King’s
New Discovery. This proving worthless, she switched to Piso’s Cure and
added the hasheesh habit to alcoholism. By this time she had acquired a
fine, typical case of patent-medicine dyspepsia. That idea never
occurred to her, though. She next tried Dr. Miles’s Anti-Pain Pills
(more acetanilid), and finally decided—having read some advertising
literature on the subject—that she had cancer. And the reason she was
leaving you, Mrs. Clyde, was that she had decided to go to a
scoundrelly quack named Johnson who conducts a cancer institute in
Kansas City, where he fleeces unfortunates out of their money on the
pretense that he can cure cancer without the use of the knife.”

“Can’t you stop her?” asked Mrs. Clyde anxiously.

“Oh, I’ve stopped her! You’ll find the remains of her patent medicines
in the ash-barrel. I flatter myself I’ve fixed _her_ case.”

Grandma Sharpless gazed at him solemnly. “‘Any doctor who claims to
cure is a quack.’ Quotation from Dr. Strong,” she said.

“Nearly had me there,” admitted he. “Fortunately I didn’t use the word
‘cure.’ It wasn’t a case of cure. It was a case of correcting a stupid,
disastrous little blunder in mathematics.”

“Mathematics, eh?” repeated Mr. Clyde. “Have you reached the point
where you treat disease by algebra, and triangulate a patient for an
operation?”

“Not quite that. But poor Maggie suffered all her troubles solely
through an error in figuring by an incompetent man. A year ago she had
trouble with her eyes. Instead of going to a good oculist she went to
one of these stores which offer examinations free, and take it out in
the price of the glasses. The examination is worth just what free
things usually are worth—or less. They sold her a pair of glasses for
two dollars. The glasses were figured out some fifty degrees wrong, for
her error of vision, which was very slight, anyway. The nervous strain
caused by the effort of the eyes to accommodate themselves to the false
glasses and, later, the accumulated mass of drugs with which she’s been
insulting her insides, are all that’s the matter with Maggie.”

“That is, the glasses caused the headaches, and the patent medicines
the stomach derangement,” said Mr. Clyde.

“And the general break up, though the glasses may have started both
before the nostrums ever got in their evil work. Nowadays, the wise
doctor, having an obscure stomach trouble to deal with, in the absence
of other explanation, looks to the eyes. Eyestrain has a most potent
and far-reaching influence on digestion. I know of one case of chronic
dyspepsia, of a year’s standing, completely cured by a change of
eyeglasses.”

“As a financial proposition,” said Mr. Gormley, “your nurse must have
come out at the wrong end of the horn.”

“Decidedly,” confirmed the doctor. “She spent on patent medicines about
forty dollars. The cancer quack would have got at least a hundred
dollars out of her, not counting her railroad fare. Two hundred dollars
would be a fair estimate of her little health-excursion among the
quacks. Any good physician would have sent her to an oculist, who would
have fitted proper glasses and saved all that expense and drugging. The
entire bill for doctor, oculist, and glasses might have been
twenty-five dollars. Yet they defend patent medicines on the ground
that they’re the ‘poor man’s doctor.”

Mr. Gormley rose. “Poor man’s undertaker, rather,” he amended. “Well,
having sufficiently blackguarded my own business, I think I’ll go.
Here’s the whole thing summed up, as I see it. It pays to go to the
doctor first and the druggist afterward; not to the druggist first and
the doctor afterward.”

Dr. Strong walked over to the gate with him. On his return Mrs. Clyde
remarked:

“What an interesting, thoughtful man. Are most druggists like that?”

“They’re not all philosophers of the trade, like Gormley,” said Dr.
Strong, “but they have to be pretty intelligent before they can pass
the Pharmaceutical Board in this state, and put out their colored
lights.”

“I’ve often meant to ask what the green and red lights in front of a
drug-store stand for,” said Mrs. Clyde. “What is their derivation?”

“Green is the official color of medical science,” explained the doctor.
“The green flag, you know, indicates the hospital corps in war-time;
and the degree of M.D. is signalized by a green hood in academic
functions.”

“And the red globe on the other side of the store: what does that
mean?”

“Danger,” replied Dr. Strong grimly.




V.
THE MAGIC LENS


“No good fairy had ever bestowed such a gift as this magic lens,” said
Dr. Strong, whisking Bettina up from her seat by the window and setting
her on his knee. “It was most marvelously and delicately made, and
furnished with a lightning-quick intelligence of its own. Everything
that went on around it, it reported to its fortunate possessor as
swiftly as thought flies through that lively little brain of yours. It
earned its owner’s livelihood for him; it gave him three fourths of his
enjoyments and amusements; it laid before him the wonderful things done
and being done all over the world; it guided all his life. And all that
it required was a little reasonable care, and such consideration as a
man would show to the horse that worked for him.”

“At the beginning you said it wasn’t a fairytale,” accused Bettina,
with the gravity which five years considers befitting such an occasion.

“Wait. Because the owner of the magic lens found that it obeyed all his
orders so readily and faithfully, he began to impose on it. He made it
work very hard when it was tired. He set tasks for it to perform under
very difficult conditions. At times when it should have been resting,
he compelled it to minister to his amusements. When it complained, he
made light of its trouble.”

“Could it speak?” inquired the little auditor.

“At least it had a way of making known its wants. In everything which
concerned itself it was keenly intelligent, and knew what was good and
bad for it, as well as what was good and bad for its owner.”

“Couldn’t it stop working for him if he was so bad to it?”

“Only as an extreme measure. But presently, in this case, it threatened
to stop. So the owner took it to a cheap and poor repair-shop, where
the repairer put a little oil in it to make it go on working. For a
time it went on. Then, one morning, the owner woke up and cried out
with a terrible fear. For the magic light in the magic lens was gone.
So for that foolish man there was no work to do nor play to enjoy. The
world was blotted out for him. He could not know what was going on
about him, except by hearsay. No more was the sky blue for him, or the
trees green, or the flowers bright; and the faces of his friends meant
nothing. He had thrown away the most beautiful and wonderful of all
gifts. Because it is a gift bestowed on nearly all of us, most of us
forgot the wonder and the beauty of it. So, Honorable Miss Twinkles, do
you beware how you treat the magic lens which is given to you.”

“To me?” cried the child; and then, with a little squeal of
comprehension: “Oh, I know! My eyes. That’s the magic lens. Isn’t it?”

“What’s that about Bettykin’s eyes?” asked Mr. Clyde, who had come in
quietly, and had heard the finish of the allegory.

“I’ve been examining them,” explained Dr. Strong, “and the story was
reward of merit for her going through with it like a little soldier.”

“Examining her eyes? Any particular reason?” asked the father
anxiously.

“Very particular. Mrs. Clyde wishes to send her to kindergarten for a
year before she enters the public school. No child ought to begin
school without a thorough test of vision.”

“What did the test show in Bettykin’s case?”

“Nothing except the defects of heredity.”

“Heredity? My sight is pretty good; and Mrs. Clyde’s is still better.”

“You two are not the Cherub’s only ancestors, however,” smiled the
physician. “And you can hardly expect one or two generations to recast
as delicate a bit of mechanism as the eye, which has been built up
through millions of years of slow development. However, despite the
natural deficiencies, there’s no reason in Betty why she shouldn’t
start in at kindergarten next term, provided there isn’t any in the
kindergarten itself.”

Mr. Clyde studied the non-committal face of his “Chinese physician,” as
he was given to calling Dr. Strong since the latter had undertaken to
safeguard the health of his household on the Oriental basis of being
paid to keep the family well and sound. “Something is wrong with the
school,” he decided.

“Read what it says of itself in that first paragraph,” replied Dr.
Strong, handing him a rather pretentious little booklet.

In the prospectus of their “new and scientific kindergarten,” the
Misses Sarsfield warmly congratulated themselves and their prospective
pupils, primarily, upon the physical advantages of their school
building which included a large work-and-play room, “with generous
window space on all sides, and finished throughout in pure, glazed
white.” This description the head of the Clyde household read over
twice; then he stepped to the door to intercept Mrs. Clyde’s mother who
was passing by.

“Here, Grandma,” said he. “Our Chinese tyrant had diagnosed something
wrong with that first page. Do you discover any kink in it?”

“Not I,” said Mrs. Sharpless, after reading it. “Nor in the place
itself. I called there yesterday. It is a beautiful room; everything as
shiny and clean as a pin.”

“Yesterday was cloudy,” observed the Health Master.

“It was. Yet there wasn’t a corner of the place that wasn’t flooded
with light,” declared Mrs. Sharpless.

“And on a clear day, with the sun pouring in from all sides and being
flashed back from those shiny, white walls, the unfortunate inmates
would be absolutely dazzled.”

“Do you mean to say that God’s pure sunlight can hurt any one?”
challenged Mrs. Sharpless, who was rather given to citing the Deity as
support for her own side of any question.

“Did you ever hear of snow-blindness?” countered the physician.

“I’ve seen it in the North,” said Mr. Clyde. “It’s not a pleasant thing
to see.”

“Glazed white walls would give a very fair imitation of snow-glare. Too
much light is as bad as too little. Those walls should be tinted.”

“Yet it says here,” said Mr. Clyde, referring to his circular, “that
the ‘Misses Sarsfield will conduct their institution on the most
improved Froebelian principles.”

“Froebel was a great man and a wise one,” said Dr. Strong. “His
kindergarten system has revolutionized all teaching. But he lived
before the age of hygienic knowledge. I suppose that no other man has
wrought so much disaster to the human eye as he.”

“That’s a pretty broad statement, Strong,” objected Air. Clyde.

“Is it? Look at the evidence. North Germany is the place where Froebel
first developed his system. Seventy-five per cent of the population are
defective of vision. Even the American children of North German
immigrants show a distinct excess of eye defects. You’ve seen the comic
pictures representing Boston children as wearing huge goggles?”

“Are you making an argument out of a funny-paper joke?” queried Grandma
Sharpless.

“Why not? It wouldn’t be a joke if it hadn’t some foundation in fact.
The kindergarten system got its start in America in Boston. Boston has
the worst eyesight of any American city; impaired vision has even
become hereditary there. To return to Germany: if you want a shock,
look up the records of suicides among school-children there.”

“But surely that has no connection with the eyes.”

“Surely it has,” controverted Dr. Strong. “The eye is the most nervous
of all the organs; and nothing will break down the nervous system in
general more swiftly and surely than eye-strain. Even in this country
we are raising up a generation of neurasthenic youngsters, largely from
neglect of their eyes.”

“Still, we’ve got to educate our children,” said Mr. Clyde.

“And we’ve got to take the utmost precautions lest the education cost
more than it is worth, in acquired defects.”

“For my part,” announced Grandma Sharpless, “I believe in early
schooling and in children learning to be useful. At the Sarsfield
school there were little girls no older that Bettina, who were doing
needlework beautifully; fine needlework at that.”

“Fine needlework!” exploded Dr. Strong in a tone which Grandma
Sharpless afterwards described as “damnless swearing.”

“That’s enough! See here, Clyde. Betty goes to that kindergarten only
over my dead job.”

“Oh, well,” said Mr. Clyde, amazed at the quite unwonted excitement
which the other exhibited, “if you’re dealing in ultimatums, I’ll drop
out and leave the stricken field to Mrs. Clyde. This kindergarten
scheme is hers. Wait. I’ll bring her. I think she just came in.”

“What am I to fight with you about, Dr. Strong?” asked Mrs. Clyde,
appearing at the door, a vision of trim prettiness in her furs and
veil. “Tom didn’t tell me the _casus belli_.”

“Nobody in this house,” said Dr. Strong appealing to her, “seems to
deem the human eye entitled to the slightest consideration. You’ve
never worn glasses; therefore you must have respected your own eyesight
enough to—”

He stopped abruptly and scowled into Mrs. Clyde’s smiling face.

“Well! what’s the matter?” she demanded. “You look as if you were going
to bite.”

“What are you looking cross-eyed for?” the Health Master shot at her.

“I’m not! Oh, it’s this veil, I suppose.” She lifted the heavy
polka-dotted screen and tucked it over her hat. “There, that’s more
comfortable!”

“Is it!” said the physician with an emphasis of sardonicism. “You
surprise me by admitting that much. How long have you been wearing that
instrument of torture?”

“Oh, two hours. Perhaps three. But, Dr. Strong, it doesn’t hurt my eyes
at all.”

“Nor your head?”

“I _have_ got a little headache,” she confessed. “To think that a
supposedly intelligent woman who has reached the age of—of—”

“Thirty-eight,” said she, laughing. “I’m not ashamed of it.”

“—Thirty-eight, without having to wear glasses, should deliberately
abuse her hard-working vision by distorting it! See here,” he
interrupted himself, “it’s quite evident that I haven’t been living up
to the terms of my employment. One of these evenings we’re going to
have in this household a short but sharp lecture and symposium on eyes.
I’ll give the lecture; and I suspect that this family will furnish the
symposium—of horrible examples. Where’s Julia? As she’s the family
Committee on School Conditions, I expect to get some material from her,
too. Meantime, Mrs. Clyde, no kindergarten for Betty kin, if you
please. Or, in any case, not that kindergarten.”

No further ocular demonstrations were made by Dr. Strong for several
days. Then, one evening, he came into the library where the whole
family was sitting. Grandma Sharpless, in the old-fashioned rocker,
next a stand from which an old-fashioned student-lamp dispensed its
benign rays, was holding up, with some degree of effort, a rather heavy
book to the line of her vision. Opposite her a soft easychair contained
Robin, other-wise Bobs, involuted like a currant-worm after a dose of
Paris green, and imaginatively treading, with the feet of enchantment,
virgin expanses of forest in the wake of Mr. Stewart White.

Julia, alias “Junkum,” his twin, was struggling against the demon of
ill chance as embodied in a game of solitaire, far over in a dim
corner. Geography enchained the mind of eight-year-old Charles, also
his eyes, and apparently his nose, which was stuck far down into the
mapped page. Near him his father, with chin doubled down over a stiff
collar, was internally begging leave to differ with the editorial
opinions of his favorite paper; while Mrs. Clyde, under the direct
glare of a side-wall electric cluster, unshaded, was perusing a
glazed-paper magazine, which threw upon her face a strong reflected
light. Before the fire Bettykin was retailing to her most intelligent
doll the allegory of the Magic Lens.

Enter, upon this scene of domestic peace, the spirit of devastation in
the person of the Health Master.

“The horrible examples being now on exhibit,” he remarked from the
doorway, “our symposium on eyes will begin.”

“He says we’re a hor’ble example, Susan Nipper,” said Bettina
confidentially, to her doll.

“No, I apologize, Bettykin,” returned the doctor. “You’re the only two
sensible people in the room.”

Julia promptly rose, lifted the stand with her cards on it, carried it
to the center of the library, and planted it so that the central light
fell across it from a little behind her.

“One recruit to the side of common sense,” observed the physician.
“Next!”

“What’s wrong with me?” demanded Mr. Clyde, looking up. “Newspaper
print?”

“Newspaper print is an unavoidable evil, and by no means the worst
example of Gutenberg’s art. No; the trouble with you is that your neck
is so scrunched down into a tight collar as to shut off a proper blood
supply from your head. Don’t your eyes feel bungy?”

“A little. What am I going to do? I can’t sit around after dinner with
no collar on.”

“Sit up straight, then; stick your neck up out of your collar and give
it play. Emulate the attentive turtle! And you, Bobs, stop imitating an
anchovy. Uncurl! _Uncurl!!_”

With a sigh, Robin straightened himself out. “I was so comfortable,” he
complained.

“No, you weren’t. You were only absorbed. The veins on your temples are
fairly bulging. You might as well try to read standing on your head.
Get a straight-backed chair, and you’re all right. I’m glad to see that
you follow Grandma Sharpless’s good example in reading by a
student-lamp.”

“That’s my own lamp,” said Mrs. Sharpless. “Seventy years has at least
taught me how to read.”

“How, but not what,” answered the Health Master. “That’s a bad book
you’re reading.”

Grandma Sharpless achieved the proud athletic feat of bounding from her
chair without the perceptible movement of a muscle.

“Young man!” she exclaimed in a shaking voice, “do you know what book
that is?”

“I don’t care what book—”

“It is the Bible.”

“Is it? Well, Heaven inspired the writer, but not the printer. Text
such as that ought to be prohibited by law. Isn’t there a passage in
that Bible, ‘Having eyes, ye see not’?”

“Yes, there is,” snapped Mrs. Sharpless. “And my eyes have been seeing
and seeing straight for a g